#assignment 

Virginia Woolf's, 'Mark on the Wall' is a short story which defies convention and challenges typical narrative analysis through its plot-less nature. The stream of consciousness narrative tells a story that, while conventionally simple, opens up a complex discussion about the fragility of human thought, and the vulnerable nature of self-reflection. The narrator's focus hinges on an unknown mark on the wall, and they spend the remainder of the text interpolating what the mark is and what it means. In doing this, the text invites readers to do the same. The vague nature of the stream of consciousness narrative challenges our typical understanding of narrative interpretation, and the narrators persistent inquiry into the mark on the wall suggests that it is significant or reflects some important theme of the narrative worth exploring. As readers soon uncover, alongside the narrator, the mark is deemed insignificant, raising the question as to why it prompted profound examination to begin with. In doing this, Woolf forces readers to reflect on both the thoughts of the narrator and their own interpretation of the marks significance. This elevates the text above many other modernist works, boasting a narrative structure which exposes the fragility of human thought while also projecting themes relevant to Woolf herself. However, these themes are explored in such a nuanced way that the text allows itself to be subjectively malleable, offering a more complex exploration of human interpretation, and what it means to be significant. 

While the thematic depth of the text offers readers much to analyse, core to 'Mark on the Wall's complexity is at root in its narrative style constructed by Woolf.  The story is told in the form of a stream of consciousness unfolding from the moment the narrators attention is brought to the mark on the wall. The reader is already embraced with uncertainty as the narrator reflects, "perhaps it was the middle of January...that I first looked up and saw the mark on the wall" (Woolf 272). This uncertainty in the introduction braces the reader for what is to be an ever uncertain collection of thoughts, a notion which acts as a stark juxtaposition to the conclusion of the text, where it is certainly defined that the mark, "was a snail" (276). This discordance is further reinforced with the immediate mention of  the "three chrysanthemums" (272) which indicates to the narrator that "it must have been the winter time" (272) despite these flowers typically blooming in autumn, not winter. This invites the notion that perception and time are both fluid within the narrators consciousness, which allows Woolf to invite more complex ideas of thought which dissect human reflection on reality. Anne Besnault-Levita explores how the vagueness of the narrative which revolves around the mark deceives the reader in her article on the implicit in Woolf's short fictions. She explores how the reader is lured to interpret based on what is not said, as the narrators encounter with the mark is more an encounter with life itself as she explores all the avarices of what could be, regardless of what the mark is (Besnault-Levita 135-147). This in itself, is core to modernist fiction, as it explores how humanity is infinitely complex not through definition but by potential. This is reinforced within the text further, with the narrator using the mirror as an allegory, describing the "importance of these reflections...there is not one reflection but an almost infinite number" (Woolf 274). 

The illusion of significance is a pressing matter throughout the text and it is through the analysis of the mark itself that readers are invited to explore it. The narrator initially invites the want to uncover the truth of the mark, yet continually denies any absolution through her incessive ramblings of thought. This is done almost ironically so at times, where the narrator closes in on a definition for the mark before allowing a new thought or anecdote to take over. Such as when the narrator describes the mark as "a small round mark, black upon the white wall, about six or seven inches above the mantelpiece" (272) before her thoughts drift to how "our thoughts swarm upon a new object...as ants carry a blade of straw" (272). These departures from definition challenges traditional notions of significance and in doing so allows itself to be creatively liberating. David Bradshaw explores in his introduction to the Oxford University Press' print of "The Mark on the Wall and Other Short Fiction," where he identifies how readers are captivated by unpropitious motifs, finding day dreams of their surroundings more appealing than printed words (Bradshaw xiii-xv). This is especially pressing for the modernist objectives of "Mark on the Wall", with the plot-less nature of the text and the ambiguity of significance acting as mental liberation from what society coins as definite thoughts. This is brought more to light where the narrator expresses "the inaccuracy of thought...the ignorance of humanity," (Woolf 272) in reference to, "the mystery of life," (272) suggesting that humanities need to define is in constant flux with our mental inaccuracies. This is reinforced through the text itself where both the narrator and readers pursuit to define the mark is proven inaccurate itself. 

In the quest to uncover the meaning of the mark, the narrator opens up room for many possible interpretations of the text. Through these interpretations we can analyse the subjective malleability of the text, most evident through the narratives feminist interpretations, and its discourse of wartime themes. Throughout the text are clear indications which show criticism of the patriarchy, and an exploration of feminist themes such as where the narrator discusses the "masculine point of view which governs our lives" (275). Jorge Sacido Romero and Laura M. Lojo Rodriguez' article on gendered spaces in "The Mark on the Wall", highlights this interpretation and explores how space, examined through the allegory of the wall, is never a neutral emptiness but made of the complex layers of cultural, social and ideological conditions which inhabit them (Romero and Rodriguez 93). They elaborate further on this, examining how gender and space are mutually dependant, denoting masculine associations with the public sphere, and feminine associations with the private sphere (95). The text accommodates this exploration by constraining the narrators thoughts to a setting associated with the private sphere, a living room in a house, while her thoughts of the wider world and it's history hinges on men as a focal point such as the mention of "Shakespeare" and "Charles the First" (273). Simultaneously, wartime themes are injected intermittently throughout the text, with the narrator alluding to but never directly confronting the ongoing conflict. This is until the end of the text where the war is highlighted as the snail is revealed as the narrators partner exclaims, "Curse this war; God damn this war...why we should have a snail on our wall," (276). Despite the mention of the war, the narrator does not acknowledge it and rather comments on the snail again, suggesting the omnipresence of wars conflict in the every day. While there is prominent evidence to support and explore these themes, neither of are held in higher prominence than the mark itself, and its insignificance. In doing this, it can be argued that the narrators exploration of themes which relate to her is an embodiment of self-reflection spurred upon by the mark. As the text itself acts to invite the readers to do the same, it opens an invitation for introspection, not only for the themes relevant to the narrator, but for complex human thought in general as readers continue to re-evaluate and interpret the human condition as defined by society.

Through the vague yet complex allegory of the mark itself, the text offers a nuanced resonance with the process of thought and human cognition, one that is mirrored through the narrators own exploration of thought. The elusiveness of the mark means it can be both anything and nothing in accordance to the narrator, and while it is deduced to being a snail, the introspective thought it has conjured offers a deeper significance. The same can be argued about the text itself, with the conclusion appearing to devalue the rest of the text, despite it conjuring such elaborate thought and dissection. In doing this, Woolf challenges traditional notions of significance and definition through the ambiguous, plot-less nature of the text. Olga Vorobyova explores this further in an article on cognition and literary interpretation in "Mark on the Wall". She expands on the relativity of time and motion in the text, and the ultimate ambiguity of closure, examining how imagination is often anchored by physical detail or an object (Vorobyova 1, 8). By defining the objects identity as insignificant in comparison to the thoughts it conjures, the narrative and its lack of plot or cohesion offers a liberation of imagination where thought itself is entirely subjective. This allows Woolf to craft a text where all predisposed definitions of certainty lose credibility, in favour of the subjectivity of both the narrators thoughts and the readers conclusions.

In conclusion, Virginia Woolf's "Mark on the Wall" acts as a an exploration of both the fragility and complexity of human cognition. The plot-less nature of the narrative allows Woolf complete freedom in weaving a stream of consciousness narrative that is as much a reflection of thought that it is an invitation for new, complex thought. The narrators quest to find significance in the insignificant, while reflecting on the history and legacy of humankind, reveals a deeper narrative which questions many predetermined notions of definition surrounding the human experience. In offering the vague narrative it does, the text supports complex thought which defies traditional narrative evaluation, and as a result exposes the vulnerability and primal nature of self-reflection. In this way, the text is of a timeless quality, able to examine themes relevant to Woolf yet allow near infinite reinterpretation regardless of social and cultural bounds due to the malleable subjectivity of the texts plot-less nature. Ultimately, Woolf's method of blending an ambiguous narrative device in tandem with the stories plot-less nature offers a text which embraces themes of modernism while being enigmatic of Woolf's own style. The result of this is a text that while simple, transcends our comprehension of traditional narrative structure and thus analysis, and invites readers into a whole new realm of complex thought and liberated imagination.

------- - - -- - 

I was quite excited initially approaching this assignment as I have found great appreciation for modernism through my studies in Limerick, as well as my Erasmus where I was particularly attracted to William Faulkner's works. In particular, I enjoyed the exploration of human cognition in texts like, "As I Lay Dying," and as such was greatly looking forward to examining what Virginia Woolf's texts had to offer. I immediately resonated with "The Mark on the Wall," and found its concept both ironic but also intellectual in how it explored themes such as feminism and war. As I did further research into the text, I found myself fascinated with the layers of complexity which reveal themselves as one attempts to uncover meaning from the text. It was through this that I realised the cognitive depth to the story, and the mental explorations it offers. I found it initially challenging to transcribe these insights into words, but through further academic research, and by watching other individuals review their experience with the text, I found myself able to properly compose my thoughts about the story, what it signifies and moreover what it invites readers explore. I ultimately found the story to be genius in how it aligned the quest for significance of the mark with the significance of the text itself, and through this it revealed the intertextual possibilities of the modernist style. I feel I personally resonated with a lot of the ideas proposed by the text, and I found its liberation of thought to be particularly compelling. In undertaking this assignment, and in choosing this essay title, I feel my understanding of modernist works and impressionism has been elevated and I am greatly looking forward to finding more authors like Woolf, who challenge  traditions of the medium.