#assignment 

It's been a year and three days since the power went out. I think. It's been harder to keep track of the further we get from outage day. Dad likes to keep count, says it reminds him that time is, in fact still moving, despite all the clocks hanging dead still. I eyed the dusty clock which hung crooked in the corner of what was once Mam's study, it was as lifeless as anything else in the room. I wondered then if the clocks ever worked again, if we'd go by their old time or set a new one. The thought quickly faded away as the thuds of Dad's feet approached the open door. Hastily, I slid the camcorder I was fiddling with behind me and looked innocently towards him as he appeared in the doorway. My heart racing. He looked fed up.
"What're you doing in her study again?" he spoke with a shred of disappointment. I answered with an undetermined shrug. He released a heavy sigh which was nearing a grunt. "I need you to head to town today, we need to stock more turf- oh and candles don't forget candles," he snapped his fingers repeatedly at this eureka moment.
"Who am I getting them off this time?"
"The Fitz's," he admitted hesitantly, "barter with them, if we give away too much of our steel we'll be fucked before winter, if they give you hassle don't mind them, tell them you'll go to Mary Moore's instead."
"Mary didn't have turf the last time."
"She'll have candles." With that he walked away, knowing well I'd be coming home with at best a few candles.

I decided it'd be best to continue somewhere that wasn't the house, so I headed out to the shed, camcorder tucked neatly into my jacket pocket. What was once our humble little two story, tucked neatly into the minor road that led into town, was now a fortified den. Spiked steel walls made of anything and everything spanned the perimeter, with several walkways that led out to the likes of the shed and greenhouse. Stepladders were positioned intermit idly that'd allow you to peak over the walls, Dad had to bolt them down though after he kept falling off them anytime he'd be shooting raiders. I reached the shed, and ran through the tedious task of unbolting and unlocking the series of locks and latches Dad had secured to the door. The shed was freezing. In one end was Dads workshop area, where he melted and fused anything not being used into all sorts. The other side of the shed was lined with rusted dirtied shelves, lined with our winter stockpile. Despite the days to winter edging closer, the shelves weren't getting any fuller. I settled down the camera and sparked up a candle, which I was strictly forbidden to do during the day. This was special though. Let's try this again. One year and three days ago approximately, there was a power outage across the entirety of Ireland. Except it wasn't just that, if it was that simple we wouldn't be cooped up like doomsday preppers scrounging just to live. Anything electrical ceased to function. Phones, lights, cars. If it had a battery or a wire, you could be sure it was now completely useless. I paused for dramatic effect, letting the camera lens stare me out of it. The first year was chaos, I took a step back, posing and fanning my hands out in front of me like an explosion. My eyes snapped back to the camera after almost losing focus. All the main cities fell to looters and mobs, that's when people realized that without power, the cities didn't have much going on after the looting was done. I didn't realize I had started fiddling with my pocket knife, flicking the blade out and quickly tucking it back in. I glanced between it and the camera before hiding it back inside my boot strap. If anyone ever ends up watching this, you'll probably be wanting to know how despite all this, I've a working camera. To that I have no answer, it just works, miraculously. What is it worth? Somehow nothing yet everything. All I know for certain is that I can't let anyone else find it, I can't risk losing this and it will be taken in a heartbeat. So I'll keep it with me and show you, whoever you are or will be, what's happened since the power went out. Let me show you town.

I spied out through the narrow slits in our wall before slinking out a hidden latch which opened into a ditch. It was one of the few hidden exist that no one could find, Dad didn't even know about this. After some rough scrapes from brambles and a dousing of rain and ditch water, you'd end up in an overgrown trail leading to the river. It was safer to take the river trail to town, raiders stuck to roads in hopes of interrupting inter-town caravans of supplies which ran an occasion, doing a circuit of all the major outposts in the county and keeping some semblance of economy shifting. They were getting fewer as the days went on though. I stomped down through the thickets of field and squeeze through untamed hedge until the gushing's of the river could be heard along the way. This was as loud as it got nowadays, the running water and chattering's of birds. My boots trudged through the thick mud which paved a path towards town. My eyes wandered all over, guiding the camera through rays of sun, focusing on clusters of crows in the trees. That's what Mom used to always say, that I was for the birds. She never meant it badly though like everyone else, just that nature suited me. When the power went out, it wasn't long before Mom ran out of her medicine. Dad did everything he could to trade for them, but it wasn't enough. What could you do? I panned the camera down to the river, its banks bursting with overflow, swallowing everything in its path. Dad changed after what happened to Mam. That's when he realized there was no going back, that if the world was changing so was he. He had never killed a man until after Mam died, now it was just one of those things as he'd put it.

I crept along where the river met the town and carefully entered under a bridge, keeping my camera held low. I panned it across the street leading down into the town square, showing the shattered abandoned buildings, raw carcasses with nothing but dust and glass to occupy their fronts. Occasionally, a building would appear fortified with walled wooden exteriors, sometimes makeshift towers for men to keep watch. Town operated under a militia system, led by three families who formed a union once the chaos settled in the first year of the outage. Between the three of them they had enough farmland to keep the town going, well, what was left of the town. In exchange for that, the community banded together for defence, forming militia groups from the healthy and putting anyone else to work. Dad was having none of it, says we're better off by ourselves. I think he knows now he was wrong, but with it nearing winter its too late to show up begging and hungry now. Two men on horseback slowly trotted down the town keeping watch, I caught a quick glimpse of them with the camera before hiding it away once again. They each eyed me carefully, and continued on. Town was eerily quiet. It was too risky to stay outside so everyone stayed cooped up unless disturbed. I wasn't in the mood for bartering with the Fitz's so I made straight for the Moore's, whose house was a makeshift fort built around the diesel pumps of an old filling station. What good it was now. I timidly approached the rusted red entrance and gave it a wrap in a timed, four knock sequence; the code. 
"Trading or selling", a voice harped out from behind the door.
"Trading, steel for candles." They paused for a second, I could hear them scrawling something down onto paper. Then after a minute of waiting, a panel on the door opened out revealing a bin for depositing. I tossed in some sheets of steel, and a few seconds later it returned with a zip lock bag of tealight candles.

The walk back was peaceful, not the eery peace which embossed the town but a calming one. I let the camera drift around space, accumulating some much needed B roll as I approached the house. I retraced the steps I had imprinted onto the mud earlier, a routine I was used to repeating now. I pushed past the hedges and upon departing from the river, its gushing echoes were replaced with distance pangs of steel. My heart raced with uncertainty, and I darted forward towards the house. My feet kicked violently through the overgrown field before diving knees first into the ditch entrance. I crawled my way though hastily, cutting myself open on thorn and steel. I could hear shouts from further on inside. They shouts of warning, and yelps of pain. I scrambled through towards the house, past several doors which were left ominously swinging open. Bursting into the kitchen, I saw the men. There was two of them standing, one desperately pumping a river of maroon out of a crevasse in his head.
"Dad!" I called out without thinking, the fright in my voice obvious. He stood before the two men brandishing a large reinforced pipe, with welded clumps of steel jutting sporadically out of the top. His eyes narrowed onto me as I called out.
"Help me will you Sam!" He roared out, gripping his weapon tightly. There was a time before he would have told me to run or hide. He was beyond that now. The men turned to me in tandem, caught off guard by my entrance. Within a second Dad had belted another one over the head for him to bleed out, and knocked the other off the wall. "Who're you with!" He roared at the remaining man who lay defeated sliding down our once kitchen wall. "You with those new Delaney's in town?" The man coughed up blood and moaned in pain.
"Just fucking get on with it," he cried desperately. Dad payed him the same pleasure he did the other two, the kitchen now pooling in blood. He panted heavily, and wiped blood off his brow.
"I don't know how they got in the back, they touch you?" I shook my head timidly. I was still staring at the crimson ooze at my feet. "What've you got in your hand?" Dad asked, furrowing his expression with confusion. My heart skipped a beat, I had forgotten in all the commotion that the camera was still running, gripped tightly in my right hand. He stomped through the blood, and snatched it from me. "This a camera?" He eyed it puzzled, turning it around and staring and its cracked, broken screen. He looked back at me awaiting a response. He got none. "You're for the birds," he said begrudgingly, tossing the camera aside onto the bloodied pool on the kitchen floor.

# [[EH4037 Short Story Assignment Draft 2]]
# [[EH4037 Short Story Assignment Draft 2 Prep]] 