#assignment 

Horse hooves clacketed down Main Street, kicking up mud and rubble as I watched from an adjacent alley. I hauled my sack of steel scrap close to me as I hugged the wall. Carefully raising my camcorder to my face, and let it trace along the street focusing on the riding militia men. Would make for some good B-Roll footage. I clamped the screen shut and tucked it away before continuing on. Had to be mindful of the militia, they'd usually let me pass but with the scrap on me you'd never know. I maneuverer further along Main Street and passed through the eerily quiet square. You wouldn't notice it at first, but positioned up in windows atop the old town apartments and council houses were sentries. There were more men on lookout than usual too, their watching eyes passing along the streets like security cameras, their rifles at the ready. I stuck to the alleys I knew, carefully passing along to the far side of town, the other side of the Whitehorse River. Once I knew it was safer, I took the camera out again.

I dragged the camera along the derelict buildings of Mountrath, there boarded up fronts complimenting their lifeless stature. I figured I should provide some commentary, to fill the looming silence that had infected this side of town. It's been a year and twenty seven days since the power went out, though admittedly it's been harder to keep track the further we get from outage day. Dad likes to keep count, says it reminds him that time is, in fact still moving, despite all the clocks hanging still. It wasn't just the power though, all electronic devices just ceased to function. Houses were left like doll houses, full of useless utilities providing nothing but shelter and security, cars were left paused in drives and car parks and light even became a limited resource, hence my venture to town today. Dad had sent me in for candles and turf off Mary Moore. The last time I came trading though she wouldn't part ways with her turf, said they'd be needing as much as they could hold on to for winter. I told him that too, all he said was "she'll have candles," and left it at that. When the raiding's had started, the Moore's were lucky in that they choose to bunker down in the church along with a load of other families. Now it was both a stronghold and centre for trade for the town. They were one of the three families running the place now, and the only family that me and Dad were on decent terms with. Turning the camera on its side, I captured a vertical shot of the church, and the large wooden perimeter that started at the gates and pulled back to its main entrance. I lay the camera down there, leaving it run while I approached the main gate. It watched on as I wrapped the gate with a knock which let them know I was here to trade. A few words, latch opens and bag exchanges later and I was up fifty candles.

The walk home was always arduous. Raiders sweeped the roads in hopes of clashing with traders vans or moving settlements, or in this case a kid with fifty candles. I stuck to the fields I knew were safe enough, and kept an eye on the roads panning the camera along. Crows stirred from haunting branches above, their caws resonating into the emptiness of once cow ridden fields. The power lines hung in mockery from above. Since the power went out, main cities have been cesspools of looters. Not that they have much of importance going on now anyways, rural towns became mans bastion of survival with farmers and laborers winning the career jackpot in this powerless dystopia. Dad had gone through phases of carpentry and engineering work, now he was a full time metal smith. Up in the Slieve Blooms, our once humble two story was now an iron fortress of spiked bars and metal perimeters. A bit overkill for it being just the two of us I've always reckoned, but he's just been that way since Mom died. 
We spent the first few months since outage day desperately trying to find or trade for her medicine but sure it was no use. We lost Elle once winter came then, coldest one in years it felt. That's what had everyone on edge now, summer had come to a close and hopes were running out. Still no contact from outside of Ireland, and no-one who's left the country has come back. Now we had another winter to face. I kept the camera held high as I pushed through dense hedges and leaped over bogs and ditches. Some of them still had barbed wire from when the Fitz's were set up here in the spring, rust, blood and muck were each embedded into the barbs. The smell was dire, the camera couldn't quite capture that. Closer to the house, we laid out some wooden beams like bridges across some of the denser ditches. Dad always hassled me for leaving them up, saying I was practically inviting people to come raid us. My boots, welded with hardened mud, slapped off the wood as I paced over the gaps between the fields. More crows took off. Mam used to always say I was for the birds. Not in the sense that I was mad, she just used to compare me to the birds and how they got on with things. Unphased yet always moving. I held the camera steady, zooming onto carrion crow which appeared to be staring at me. Did they know the power was gone? Surely they'd notice there were less people about, and a lot less noise on the roads. With that thought, the crow took off and joined his murder in the sky. Maybe they have no idea.

Our home, or Fort Overkill as I've dubbed it, stood atop a hill amidst a trail of trees which helped obscure the abode from the outside world. I slinked up through the trees, carving through the usual route I took. Then it appeared, the looming moat of steel which spiked around our house. It was impressive for the year that was put into it, crude but impressive. I made sure to snatch some shots with the camcorder as I approached. The walls were violent and jagged, an indication for any visitors to stray far away. I hugged the wall and followed it around to one of the hidden latch entrances, we had no such thing as a main gate or door. Dad was convinced that people would get desperate before the second winter, and wasn't taking any chances. I rooted my hand through the dirt beneath the latch and fumbled my fingers around until I found the release. After loosing the improvised lock, I wiped the dirt onto my clothes and crawled through the opening before locking it again behind me. I didn't always lock the latches, it was so much effort to unlock them from the outside, especially so if rain decided to make the process that much more muddy and awkward. Once inside the perimeter, our house came into clear view. Windows were bolted with sheets of metal, doors were reinforced and spikes were layered along the wall to prevent anyone from climbing in. I paid a quick visit to the storage shed to leave off the candles. I readied the camera, excited to show off our timid winter stockpile. That's when I saw the door slightly ajar. I lowered the camera slowly, as I inched to the shed door. I eased my fingers against its cold touch and pushed it inward, letting it loosely drag open. Something was off. Both our stockpile and Dad's workshop were huddled together in our less than favourably sized shed and it was unheard of for him to ever leave the door open. I gripped the camera and after a moments pause, sprinted inside the house. 

My heart began to race more as I met the backdoor, which too was ajar. I peered the camera through first, and let myself follow behind. Now inside, I could hear shuffling and incoherent murmurs. It was strange hearing another voice that wasn't Dad's in the house. I slowly inched toward the kitchen, where the men came into view. Just two of them, rummaging through shelves, packing their already full gear bags with what little they could find. They were lightly armoured, not part of any local faction but not ordinary looters either. The camera hung still while by eyes wandered, and as they moved off subject they caught something in my peripherals. Hugged tightly behind the kitchen door, was Dad, his narrowed violent eyes darting between me and the men. His thick fingers gripping a metal pipe, which he had altered with clumps of melted, spiked steel. He gave me a nod, and turned his attention back to the men, unblinking. He waited as did I, watching in eerie pause as the men filled the gear bags. I held the camera still. Dad gripped his pipe. It erupted so fast then, one man paused to zip the bag as Dad emerged from behind the door bringing the pipe down on his cranium with lethal force. Crimson slicked the kitchen floor, as the monstrous pipe bludgeoned through the strangers skull. His limp body slumped and crashed off the floor, causing our wooden seats to screech off the tiles in a cacophony of chaos while the second man turned around. Dad lunged forward, getting the pipe under the mans chin and gripping it tightly from behind. He tried to roar, but the immense pressure of lead crushed his throat, and his life slipped away. His feet kicked violently, sloshing the deep pooling blood about, until they slowed and eventually stopped. I was pale as milk then, and Dad was flushed red like a bloated plum. He panted heavily.
"You get the candles?" He asked, tossing the pipe down and moving away from the counter. I nodded timidly. Then his face scrunched up, furrowing in confusion. "What've you got in your hand?" I had almost forgotten the camera, but by the time I had realised he had snatched it from me. He eyed it puzzled, turning it around and staring and its cracked, broken screen. Lifeless. He glanced back at me then, "you're for the birds," he said begrudgingly, tossing the camera aside into the bloodied pool which was coalescing on the kitchen floor.






























# [[EH4037 Short Story Assignment Draft 2 Prep]] 