#assignment 

The ending sequence of Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness see's Marlow, the narrator and protagonist of the text, confronting Kurtz' fiancé, referred to as the Intended, about the conclusion of events which surrounded the hunt and eventual death of Kurtz. I believe Conrad's choice of ending scene was both deliberate and essential in conveying the core themes of the text and suspending the end of the narrative in a moment of reflection, highlighting the title of the text itself and the narrative behind it. This is accomplished with the vivid, precise descriptions of setting and character within the final scene as well as the dialogue exchanged throughout. Ultimately, both the scene itself and the narrative consequence of the entire text weighs upon the interaction between Marlow and the Intended. Conrad uses this interaction as a symbol to represent the message of the text, and explores it throughout the final scene using the dynamics of both these characters and the setting which surrounds them both physically and mentally.

Analysing the designated passage, the first lines hastily establish a tone and theme which remains consistent throughout the final scene; light. "The dusk was falling," introduces the scene in the final stages of twilight, with darkness being illuminated by a patiently approaching light (*Norton Anthology 128*). This encroaching light is brought to focus in the line that follows, "The tall marble fireplace had a cold and monumental lightness" (*128*). These descriptions guide the readers focus, entrusting that the initially described looming darkness will be lightened and dispersed via the guiding whiteness of the environment of this last scene. As the scene progresses these descriptions continue in volume, particularly with the Intended herself who is described as having, "fair hair" and a "pale head" (*128*). 

These depictions of light and whiteness are a stark juxtaposition to the rest of the narrative, where darkness is often used to reinforce the savagery or desperation faced by Marlow. Despite the descriptions of light however, as the scene progresses, themes of darkness begin to manifest once again, admitted by Marlow who acknowledges to himself, "with every spoken word, the room was growing darker" (*129*). Throughout the text, Conrad has hinged a lot of his thematic storytelling around the motifs of light and dark, with the title being the most poignant of these examples. This final scene embraces this, invoking imagery of lightness but instilling a dark reality around it. In doing this, Conrad clearly distinguishes between Europe and Africa as both set pieces and narrative elements within the text. This allows him to explore themes of colonialism while allowing him freedom to be enigmatic. While the imagery and depiction of light sets the themes up to be explored, it is the dialogue and exchange between Marlow and the Intended which delivers the message behind the themes.

The significance of the Intendeds inclusion in the final scene becomes clear through analysing her exchange with Marlow and what it represents within the text. While being described with imagery invoking light, she is sub sequentially associated with despair in relation to the death of Kurtz. She is dressed, "all in black" and is described by Marlow to have a voice "full of mystery, desolation and sorrow" (*128-129*). This sinister undertone described throughout, mirrors the dark reality which looms behind Marlow as he speaks to her. Only he knows the truth of Kurtz demise, his madness and his African mistress. The responsibility to deliver this information to the Intended becomes clouded when her overwhelming distress and affirmation of Kurtz proves troubling for Marlow. As the scene continues on and their exchange progresses, it becomes clear the focal point of this interaction is the truth behind Kurtz and whether all is revealed. Reinforced by the continuing descriptions of looming and approaching darkness, the scene swells to a climax as the Intended insistently persists at Marlow to confirm her affirmations of Kurtz and his own admiration of him. She repeats, "you admired him" and goes as far as to suggest, "it was impossible to know him and not to admire him" (*129*). 

The Intendeds insistence on both defending and boasting the legacy of Kurtz unknowingly upon Marlow, who is amidst battling the harsh realities of the truth surrounding Kurtz is representative of the texts statement on colonialism as a whole. Throughout the text, the results of colonialism is consistently depicted harshly, though indirectly, across the entire narrative. There is a stark distinction drawn between Marlow and his companions versus how the natives are described throughout the text, the same conclusion can be reached in regard to how setting is described. These predetermined bias's crumble upon each other when it is revealed towards the end how Kurtz, who has been both praised and sought after throughout the text, is depicted as mad, perishing far from home accompanied by his African mistress. The integrity of Kurtz therefore, represents the integrity of the entire operation and colonialism as a whole. With Kurtz disgraced, the sinister reality behind colonialist endeavours is revealed, though exclusively to Marlow in this instance. With this key context in mind, the importance of his exchange with Kurtz' Intended holds much more weight than it'd seem on a surface level. 

With this understanding of Kurtz place within the narrative as a focal point of symbolism about colonialism, the significance of the Intended and her interaction with Marlow becomes integral to the development of the texts themes as a whole. Her naivety towards the truth behind Kurtz represents the naivety or forced naivety of Europe towards the condition of colonialism. This is explored further through the dialogue exchanged in the second half of this passage. One line spoken by the Intendant opens up this exploration, where she speaks on Kurtz and "all his greatness, of his generous mind, of his noble heart, nothing remains- nothing but a memory" (*130*). The implication of which suggests thematically that Marlow and the Intendants recounts of Kurtz legacy represent societal outlooks on colonialism. This is shown through the Intendants naïve and incorrect summary of Kurtz legacy and Marlow's hesitation to share the truth of it. Kurtz presence in the text acts as a narrative device for colonialism and this exchange between Marlow and the Intendant reinforces what he represents. 

Throughout the narrative, the readers understanding of the text, its setting and its contexts is presented through the account of Marlow. His decision to withhold the truth from the Intended is a crucial element to the text and Conrad's choice to end the novel this way is greatly significant to its colonialist themes. Even more so, when compared to how the introduction to the novel is presented. Marlow uses imagery to convey darkness and a sinister undertone when depicting Gravesend describing the "air was dark above Gravesend, and farther back seemed condensed into a mournful gloom" (*74*). The juxtaposition between this, and the description of the Intendeds place in the final passage reveals two different perspectives shown by Marlow. One of these is where he can face the truth of colonialism and its effects, addressing where the heart of darkness truly is. Another sees him concealing the truth, allowing the darkness to instead manifest around places previously depicted as places of light and whiteness.

The enigmatic nature of this style of narrative does prove problematic when analysing its colonialist themes and commentary. Discerning the intentions of Joseph Conrad's choice of ending scene is to consider the message behind the narrative itself. To say that the ending scene is a message striking down colonialism lacks consistency with the rest of the narrative. This is due to  Marlow's depictions of Africa and its natives throughout the text, portraying them unfairly as savages with no discernible consistency or relation to theme. The question of intention here lies within Conrad's choice of Marlow, as a character presenting misaligned interpretations of perspectives in relation to colonialism. Despite this, the elements which make up the final scene deliver on the impact of Kurtz' character as a symbol of colonialism. Conrad's choice in setting, and how he constructs the dialogue between Marlow and the Intended ends the novel on an uncomfortable, morally ambiguous note which invites both discussion and analysis of  the Intended and Marlow's characters. As a result, the final scene is proves its significant to the moral implications and understanding of the colonialist themes presented throughout the entire text.

# [[EH4007 Close Reading Assignment, Second Draft]]  