# Essay 1 - Introduction to Horror, House of Leaves and Catharsis
### Sources

- Asma, Stephen T. On Monsters: A Natural History of Our Worst Fears. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
- https://www.hplovecraft.com/writings/texts/essays/shil.aspx - Supernatural horror in literatre lovecraft
- Monsters on the Brain - https://muse-jhu-edu.proxy.lib.ul.ie/article/566959
- Being and Time - http://pdf-objects.com/files/Heidegger-Martin-Being-and-Time-trans.-Macquarrie-Robinson-Blackwell-1962.pdf 
- Social neuroscience of predudice - https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.4324/9780203567708-1/social-neuroscience-prejudice-david-amodio 
- Monstrous Society review - https://muse-jhu-edu.proxy.lib.ul.ie/article/741851/pdf
- Monsters evil beings - https://ebookcentral-proquest-com.proxy.lib.ul.ie/lib/univlime-ebooks/reader.action?docID=3441642
- A Dreamer and a Visonary - https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt5vjhg7
- The Weird Tale - https://books.google.ie/books?hl=en&lr=&id=ubE5ylK0GTgC&oi=fnd&pg=PR9&dq=---.+The+Weird+Tale.+1990.+Holicong,+Pennsylvania:+Wildside+Press+LLC,+2003.+&ots=CL9RvLVz-r&sig=BGAE6lTcUONa0bhraT-AQMF8S1s&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false
- Powersof Horror - https://www.thing.net/~rdom/ucsd/Zombies/Powers%20of%20Horror.pdf
- Apocolyptic Archetypes - https://www.mdpi.com/2077-1444/12/11/913
- Bloodlust vampyre - https://hekint.org/2020/02/04/bloodlust-the-embodiment-of-the-uncanny-in-the-vampyre/#:~:text=John%20William%20Polidori's%20The%20Vampyre,Byron%20by%20publisher%20Henry%20Colburn.
- Character crisis - https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/victorian-literature-and-culture/article/abs/character-crisis-hegemonic-negotiations-in-robert-louis-stevensons-strange-case-of-dr-jekyll-and-mr-hyde/E72D81BBD0E304602045E40E89C222C3 
- The Contemporary Gothic - https://www.researchgate.net/publication/336742451_The_Contemporary_Gothic
- Embodied Visions - https://books.google.ie/books?hl=en&lr=&id=ZkXiBwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PT9&dq=%22Embodied+Visions:+Evolution,+Emotion,+Culture,+and+Film%22+(ResearchGate)&ots=pJEUKkIZSo&sig=LBTNqCnql6lfonGLjIOjI9RXulA&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false 
- Evolution of Horror Film - https://www.paradigmpress.org/as/article/view/765/649
## Horror as we know it
- On Monsters page 183, what is horror
- Monsters evil beings - page 1-5 - what are monsters
- 
In this thesis, it is my aim to explore the evolution of the horror genre across mediums, in an attempt to measure its unique capacity to stimulate and evoke emotional responses in audiences through psychological means. Through my research, I believe that horror holds a particularly unique relationship with the human psyche, and has the capabilities of invoking deep-rooted, primal emotions and responses through manipulation of specific conventions of mediums. Through the exploration of this, I aim to discuss how horror as a genre actively shapes societal anxieties, present from early Gothic works to postmodern interpretations, and how as a medium its self-generative collective consciousness allows itself to evolve and reform as the expectations of the medium itself does. 

The manipulation of conventions to engage with audiences is a facet of horror that can be identified in its roots, and has since evolved in tandem with the developments of the mediums themselves, and the social and cultural contexts of audiences. This is effectively done through continuous subversion of expectations, and shattering of trusts and familiarities of audiences, and forced exposure to sublime concepts which challenge human cognitions inherent want to understand and comprehend the world around us. The genre has the mechanical capabilities of both exposing and exploiting human vulnerabilities, and through intense, immersive utilisation of both narrative devices and mechanics of traditional mediums, is able to force memorable and lasting revelations on audiences which provide substance to the growth curve of the genre.

Before literature, horror can be seen strewn across folklore of a variety of cultures. These folklore and mythological interpretations of horror often use supernatural and otherworldly entities to enforce morals and lessons. Death is most often explored through this, through interpretations of the afterlife, ghosts, demons etc. This reveals the human urge to comprehend that which we cannot, and this notion acts as a core aspect of horror throughout its evolution. Sublime terror is found when human cognition is forced to tackle something it doesn't comprehend, or something which contradicts what we do comprehend. In folklore we can see the primer with the exploration of death, and the latter is later found as Gothic literature explores contradictions to societal norms as a device to invoke terror in audiences, oftentimes using pre-existing folklore in tandem with this such as with the concept of vampires stemming from creature mythos combined with contradicting facets of aristocratic society.

Psychological studies of horror have definitively proven its effect on the human psyche, and the correlation it has with traditional human responses. These studies oftentimes find that people enjoy horror as it is a controlled way to experience fears and thrills which we would be opposed to in a realistic setting, or wouldn't experience otherwise. This relates to the concept of catharsis, a psychological term whose origins comes from Greek drama and philosophy, which invites the notion that the psychological response that comes with fright allows for release of stress, allowing the ability to process fear vicariously. It is this concept which this thesis aims to explore through the lens of modern horror mediums, with the intentions of identifying specific ruptures and crux's of the genre which has evolved both alongside and as a response to human cognition.

The core texts which I will be analysing each develop this concept of catharsis, in ways unique to their mediums and the social and cultural contexts of the times they were released. Notably, House of Leaves by Mark Z. Danielewski, does this incredibly uniquely through the active physical metamorphosis of the text, a mechanic that works in tandem with its narrative to depict and invoke sublime terror, and the natural human response to said terror. Similarly, Bloodborne, a video game developed by FromSoftware and directed by Hidetaki Miyazaki, utilises mechanical devices of the video game medium to invoke the core themes of its narrative, and allows players to submerge themselves in a gothic, Lovecraftian text in a means that can only be explored within the genre of video games. These modern examples of horror literature each utilise the mechanics of their mediums which audiences are accustomed to, and breaks these conventions in ways which invoke terror in audiences while also remaining intact and relevant to the narratives told in each of them. 

The breaking of these conventions is allowed through the initial development and familiarization of them which stem from Gothic horror texts such as the Vampyre by John Polidori and The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde by Robert Louis Stevenson. While these texts do not greatly subvert the mechanical aspects of their mediums, they do subvert audiences expectations and understandings of conventions in society at the time to great effect to produce horror. This method of juxtaposing audience familiarities to expose dark truths in society, was a core theme across much early gothic literature, and as such reveals how catharsis was perceived and executed upon at the time. Since the popularisation of horror through early gothic works, the way in which authors have developed texts to continue to invoke catharsis in an ever expanding and adapting audience market is intrinsic to the design behind both House of Leaves and Bloodborne, and this thesis aims to break these design choices down and identify how they are modern bastions of the horror genre, and evidence to its exponential growth as a genre and medium.

It is evident through the analysis of these texts, that the horror genre is a result of narrative challenges to human cognition which has developed over the course of many years and many mediums. Despite the primitive or complex nature of these varying degrees of horror exploration, there are core traits which have never been replaced but rather expanded upon as we have adapted to the literature interpretations of horror. These traits reveal more about human cognition and our natural emotional responses moreso than tropes of any medium, and it is the aim of this thesis to further explore these ruptures and to develop them to allow a greater understand of our comprehension of horror, and what it reveals about the limitations and complexities of the human mind, and what it means to comprehend the incomprehensible, and furthermore how authors are able to create such texts, through narrative tools which allow them the ability to invoke terror in audiences regardless of scope or measure. House of Leaves does this throughout its narrative, and distorts the medium of books in a way which both deceives readers and invites them to submerge into the terror the text encapsulates, teasing the unravelling of a reality through its entirely unique and metamorphic narrative. 
## How House of Leaves does horror
- On Monsters page 184, the living non living analogy of the horsemen but wiht the house
- Supernatural horror lit, lovecraft
- Being and Time - angst, unknown horror, nowhere and everywhere
- Dreamer and Visionary chapter 3 - the noble eavesdropper mirroring navidson and crew in the dark labrynth
- 
House of Leaves by Mark Z. Danielewski is a horror text which quickly became renowned for its unconventional, multi-perspective narrative and unique physical design of the book itself. The story follows the Navidson family, the father Will of which is a photojournalist as they move into a new home at Ash Tree Lane. After some time living there, the family begin to notice otherworldly changes to the house, its dimensions altering slightly, new doors appearing, and rooms existing in impossible spaces. These changes continue until a dark labyrinth spawns beneath the house, and Will Navidson, assisted by his family and other characters, begins to document the terror of the house.

Where the complexities of the text begin to show is in the chronology of how this story is told, as The Navidson Record, the movie made by Will about the house, already has been filmed and published within the fictional word of House of Leaves. The reader learns of the events of the filming of Ash Tree Lane through two additional perspectives, a blind old man named Zampanò who analysise and creates a manuscript breaking down the events of the Navidson Project, and Johnny Truant, a younger man who discovers Zampanò's manuscript and finds himself deep in the exploration of the text, fascinated by the horrors it holds and the spacial anomalies of Ash Tree Lane.

The text itself uses the physical means of the medium to distinguish between these perspectives, with the font and typeface shifting between different protagonist perspectives, Johnny's story being told in a blog post style typewriter font, Zampanò's manuscript depicted as a complex mess of notes riddled with footnotes and Navidson's perspective captured through atypical third person narration as if describing the events of the recorded film. This allows for a constantly shifting narrative which embraces ambiguity and curiosity, feeding the readers insights into the incomprehensible phenomenon that is the house on Ash Tree Lane, but through the perspectives of several characters who too are attempting to comprehend it through their own respective mediums.

Zampanò's academic accounting of events, Johnny's personal exploration and the third person documentation of Navidson's experience allows for a multi-layered account of the narrative which reflects the labyrinthic nature of the house itself while each character's own interpretation of events creates layers of depth to understanding a sublime phenomenon which the reader never gets to experience without a buffer. This bewilders the reader, while in tandem encouraging them to comprehend the house alongside the multiple characters whose perspectives are offered up, which reinforces the incomprehensible nature of the house itself which is then reinforced by the metamorphosis of the book itself. 

Throughout the text, we see terror unfold as the Navidson's are left vulnerable and exposed to their own house, a space which should be accommodating of them, yet moves and contorts by itself in a manner no house should, disturbing them deeply as they find mentally trapped by the torment the house invokes. This is entirely mimicked by the text itself, forcing the readers into a mirrored experienced of the Navidson's exploration of the house. This is allowed for as the readers sole interpretation of events is through the trusted perspectives provided by the text itself, but this trust is stripped slowly from the reader as you progress through the text. Anytime the word house is used, the font changes slightly, shifting off the line or out of the type face. Strange messages lie within Zampanò's footnotes which progressively get more convoluted as the text drags on. These nuanced shifts within the text exponentially grow into a complete metamorphosis as Navidson and his assistants begin their expeditions into the dark labyrinth.  

Where the sublime terror of House of Leaves shows itself most prominently is in the expeditions into the procedurally spawning depths beneath the house on Ash Tree Lane. This labyrinth is continually described as an empty abyss of nothing, sometimes enormous in scale, other times Closter phobic, but always pitch dark and incomprehensible. It is during these expeditions, that the text within House of Leaves begin to mirror the house. During moments of empty expanse, pages become more sparse, becoming filled with negative space. Words physically stretch across the page as the hallways do. Text flips upside down, margins become narrow, and the reading experiences becomes a jarring reflection of the journey that Navidson and his crew take beneath the house. The more isolated the characters find themselves, the less words begin to fill the pages until readers find themselves reading a single word per page. This metamorphosis of the medium captures the sublime horror of the house perfectly as the readers exploration of the text itself becomes a reflection of the exploration of the house, and in a similar vein to how  the house breaks all conventions associated with a house in an incomprehensible way, the text does the same, breaking conventions of the medium of books in a way that both disorientates and terrifies the reader.

## An intro to catharsis
- On Monsters, page 3, darwin monkey experiment
- Monsters on the brain - art and the adaptive imagination
- Monsters evil beings - pg 1 - monsters embody all that is dangerous and horrible in the human imagination
This execution demonstrates a profound example of catharsis. The readers are submerged into the text with a false sense of security as is the Navidson's into their home, Zampanò into the Navidson Record, and Johnny into the manuscript, each with the intention of comprehending the initial enigmatic terror of the house. Through the metamorphosis and physical distortion of the text, readers experience the deep-rooted vulnerableness that the characters in the narrative do, and the unconventional layout of the text submits readers to psychological disorientation akin to the Navidson's experience with the house and its labyrinth. This distortion of the text enables readers to experience the process undergone by the Navidson's, which is otherwise impossible to replicate due to its incomprehensible nature. In this way, the narrative and the mechanics of the medium are intimately connected and through the experience of catharsis, the terror of the narrative is replicated through the text itself.

Where House of Leaves excels beyond normal executions of catharsis is in how it develops upon this by constructing the narrative around the punishment of morbid curiosity. Similarly to how House of Leaves breaks convention in the physical distortion of its medium, its narrative also develops contradictory to the experience the text invokes. Thus far, the text has mirrored the exploration of the house and texts within the world of the narrative and the experience the reader is having, and in doing this the text encourages the reader to pursue it, invoking that sense of catharsis as a means for readers to experience that which they could never experience under usual circumstances. 
However, the narrative itself continually reinforces themes which contradict this sentiment, and spell disastrous consequences to those who do. The character of Johnny Truant is a prime example of this, as he is quite similar to the reader in that his perspective is outward looking, driven by morbid curiosity through Zampanò's manuscript. The further Johnny's pursues the contents of the manuscript, the more fractured he becomes as he faces implications both mental and physical. His life and relationships become tattered with crisis and he begins to hallucinate and slowly lose his grip on reality. Similarly, Will Navidson's downfall is spelled by his pursuit of the houses truths, and his insistence on documenting the house becomes less so about making the documentary and moreso about comprehending the enigmatic house itself. 
Navidson's end see's him returning to the house despite all warnings in a segment that sees him descent into near madness at the sheer exposure to house to which he narrowly escapes. In both these cases, the characters which mirror the readers experience through catharsis are deeply psychologically punished for their pursuits of morbid curiosity, with their respective devices being the manuscript and the house acting as devices to represent this. In the readers case, the device is the text itself, and the contradictory nature of the narrative warning the reader to not pursue their own morbid curiosity, despite simulating catharsis, and despite completing reading a book being a core objective and aspect of the medium, stimulates fragmented intentions with the readers creating even more psychological distress and self-doubt. This is initially stimulated by the first words of the text reading, this is not for you.

The combination of layered perspectives and continual reinforcement of self-doubt is intrinsic to the sublime, near cosmic horror demonstrated throughout House of Leaves. The readers motivations and perspective are firmly aligned with the character of Johnny, being the most present account of events in the chronology of the text and being the listed author of the introduction in the text. Throughout House of Leaves, the readers are prompted through Johnny and the other perspectives to imagine and comprehend the enigmatic house on Ash Tree Lane. However, while the depictions of the house are formulated from the events that transpose within the Navidson Record, said events are depicted firstly through the manuscript of Zampanò who is a older, blind man. The consequences of this is fuelled by the already enforced self doubt of the text, that everything the reader is picturing which is already incomprehensible, is through the depiction of someone who cannot see. Already throughout the text is repeated motifs of the unknown and unfamiliar. The physics defying nature of the house, the empty black void of sight within its labyrinth, the breathing like pulsating roars from its bowels. These motifs continually invite both the readers and characters to attempt to comprehend the horror behind it all, with no real substance to implement this. With Zampanò acting as the medium, the physical manifestation of the house develops only through the realm of consciousness, which becomes furthermore distorted as we consider Johnny's hallucinations. In this way, the text becomes a self-generative stream terror, where interpretation is the sole contributor to transcribing the sublime horror of the house to the physical medium of text. The distortion of the book then implies that this attempt to make sense of it all is intrinsically wrong, and the narrative spells doom to those who attempt it, with the instigator and source of it all being Navidson, the only character who attempts to physically capture it with cameras, resulting in the Navidson Record, which remains mysterious and enigmatic throughout the text. 
# Essay 2 - Intertextuality, Bloodborne and roots in Gothic Horror
## How Bloodborne does horror
- Monsters on the brain, me not me arguement, horrors of category jamming
- Being and Time again
- Monstrous society - page 720 - bread riots, structural antagonism, bloodborne society vs church
- Monstrous society - page 721 - moral fear, crowd as grotesque, magistrate as divine
This affiliation between protagonist perspectives, narrative context and the reader to force evoke contradictory emotions in the reader is similarly done in Bloodborne, a gothic video game by FromSoftware and acclaimed director Hidetaki Miyazaki. Bloodborne is a third person, action roleplaying game which is in a similar vein to FromSoftware's previous titles, the Dark Souls series, in that a crushing difficulty is intrinsic to the games mechanics, but rewards the player through active progression and reptation. Like House of Leaves, Bloodborne's narrative works in tandem with it's mechanics to instill contradictory emotions in the player through the text, which is how it delivers upon the gothic horror genre. Bloodborne's narratives revolves around many of the common conventions of gothic literature, the interplay of supernatural elements, forbidden knowledge and the madness which comes with this. The game is set in the fictional city of Yharnam, based off Victorian gothic England, where a mysterious plague has transformed its population into beasts, and the player, who plays as an unnamed hunter, is tasked with ridding these beasts while also discovering the layers of secrets behind the games lore. 

From the beginning of the game, an aura of mystery enshrouds the entire narrative, suggesting that the buried secrets of the game are intended to remain buried. This is done so by the games enigmatic opening, where the player is greeted with no clear task, but an optional note available to read suggests to seek a paleblood moon. The unclear direction the game begins with is contradcitory to the typical video game format, which often gives clear incentives and motivations at the beginning of the game. Instead, Bloodborne punishes the player, as you begin with little knowledge and no weapons and are expected to die, with difficult enemies being placed at the games start with the intention of overwhelming the players. This initially warns the player against exploring the world, which is later reinforced by many of the characters you meet along the narrative, who each advise against pushing further into the city and warn against uncovering its secrets. This opening is similar to House of Leaves start, in that it tells the reader this book is not for you, and the combination of mechanical facets of the text, with the jarring presentation of the text, and a narrative which activlely displays punishement for pursuing forbidden knowledge.

Bloodborne continues to reinforce this contradictory nature, as when the player initially dies, they are transported to the Hunters Dream, a player hub where you can later increase your strength and upgrade weapons. Here, the player can meet one of the first notable characters of the game Gehrman, who is another enigmatic character in the text who suggests to the player to go out and kill a few beasts. With the hunters dream providing the player the first bit of welcoming respite, and the first clear task or direction, it is indicated to be a mechanically safe space. However, the mechanical loop that the hunters dream encourages activley works against the player as they progress. In order to utilise the mechanics of the hunters dream, the player must collect insight, a resource in the game that the player is told little about, but is always part of the user interface and holds a definite presence throughout the game. The player soon learns that insight is gained passively, upon witnessing the terrors within the game world. The first time a player discovers a boss, or other monstrosities, they gain insight and gain further insight as they kill these. In addition to insight, the player also earns blood echoes, the main resource of the game which allows the player to level their character and strengthen their mechanical abilities. However, what appears to be the core mechanical loop of the game is actually intrinsic to the games narrative, as the pursuit of power through blood and wisdom is thematically core to the narrative of the game.

Through the players own exploration of the world, they discover the pretense which has caused the scourge of the beast in Yharnam. The Healing Church, an enigmatic coorperation who appears to have a near omnipresence throughout the game, being the instition that employs hunters, is discovered to be the source of the plague. The player learns that scholars of the healing church discovered a mysterious healing blood in lanyrntinths beneath Yharnam, and upon dispersing its healing properties to the public began the beast pandemic after not heathing the warnings which came with the consumption of blood. The Healing Church as a result become a shadow antagonist for the player, being the source of the beasts, yet the healing church are also the provider of all the means in which the player forgoes their progression. The weapons, and upgrade mechanics of the game, and the building within the hunters dream itself are all offsprings of the healing church. Like in House of Leaves, where the reader is warned against pursuing forbidden knowledge by the narrative yet are encouraged to pursue their own forbidden knowledge, despite warning at the beginning of the text, Bloodborne encourages the player to indulge in the spoils of the Healing Church despite the narrative spelling the consequence of playing with the very same elements. This is then further built upon with the insight mechanic, and the exploration of the pursuit of knowledge and the resulting madness which is a core theme of Bloodborne.

As the player delves deeper into the story of Bloodborne, Lovecraftian elements begin to emerge within the narrative. It is discovered, that alongside the old blood, the healing church also discovered enigmatic greater beings referred to as Great Ones, within the labyrinths beneath Yharnam. This discovery formed a schism in the healing church, with certain scholars dedicating to research of the healing blood, and others becoming obsessed with these sublime creatures, extracting knowledge from them in the form of eyes, gaining power through this. This schism appears to be the downfall of the healing church, and the player begins to realise that the insight they are accumulating is the mechanical implimention of the knowledge gained from exposure and indulgence into these otherworldy beings within the narrative. Through the consumption of an item called madmans knowledge, the player gain manually increase their insight, the item itself appears to be the remains of scholars who have exposed themselves to Great Ones, and siphoned their wisdom in the form of insight. While the pursuit of insight is clearly indicated to cause madness, the player is incentivised to activily increase their own for gameplay purposes such as requiring insight in order to increase ones power through the levelling mechanic, the the purchasing of items using insight as a currency. Similarly, the player is encouraged to kill beasts, and consume their blood to gain power and healing, despite also knowing that the same process is what has caused the beastly scourge in the first place. The constant contradiction between narrative and gameplay mirrors that of House of Leaves, and as a result engulfs the game in a self-propogating cycle of the pursuit of forbidden knowledge despite the constant warnings from the narrative. 
## Texts in tandem, contradictions and roots in Gothic Horror
- On Monsters - page 6
- Social Neurologoy of predudice - we arent prisoners to our mind we have frontal cortext to help work stuff out but these texts trick us
- Apocolyptic Archetypes - abstract - regards films as a convergence of generations collective unconscious
- 
Both of these text develop upon the theory of catharsis through the respective mediums, utilising mechanics of the medium alongside their narratives to both encourage and discourage the foregoing of the catharsis experience. This contradictory experience works in tandem with the exploration of typical themes of gothic horror literature, the exploration of forbidden knowledge and the sublime. The contradictory nature of these narratives plays into the psychological responses of humans, utilising our natural allure to the unknown and our primal fear of danger. This paradoxical interplay is core to the horror genre, and both these texts utilise modern innovations to enhance the experience with house of leaves using the metamorphosis of its text and the use of multi-layered perspectives, whereas Bloodborne uses typical mechanics of FromSoftware's acclaimed soulslike genre, but adapted to worlds of Gothic fiction.

Both these texts exemplify the evolution of the horror genre through its adaptation across mediums. They each subvert expectations by utilising audiences familiarity with both the genre and respective mediums. In this way, the texts betray traditional narrative forms and as such unsettle audiences by subverting expectations from the medium itself. When utilising the fear and allure of the unknown as a crux of both their narratives, upsetting the familiarities audiences have with the mechanics of their given mediums empowers this perception of the unknown further and heightens the horror experience. In this way, these texts act as a reflection of the collective consciousness of audiences of the horror genre. House of Leaves breaks traditional norms of books by the metamorphosis of its own text, forcing readers to consume the text in unfamiliar ways such as physically having to read the book upside down for certain sections, and having access footnotes and ciphers within the pages that distract from the core text. Bloodborne similarly, punishes players for indulging in certain mechanics, such as tougher enemies appearing with higher levels of insight earned, certain enemies gaining new attacks and abilities, and giant cosmic horrors appearing in the world which act as area hazards that can negatively afflict the player. The execution of these elements across both these texts are only possible due to the familiarization audiences have with the mechanics of the mediums and genre itself. Introspectively, traditional gothic literature can be analysed under this lens, revealing how these texts too betray audiences familiarities, however it is done so through narrative executions of social and cultural contexts rather than the mechanical alterations of the mediums themselves. 

Texts such as The Vampyre by John Polidori and the Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and My Hyde are examples of traditional gothic texts that while they don't alter the mechanical means of their mediums, they do harness narrative elements to alter societal norms at the time. Where modern texts like House of Leaves and Bloodborne betray audiences expectations of the text themselves, these earlier works betray audiences societal expectations and cultural norms in an attempt to unsettle readers. Through this, we see the origins of contradictory elements used in media to elicit horror, and similar to its modern counterparts, invoke catharsis narratively. In both cases examining the Vampyre and the Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde display a focus on altering expectations of aristocratic Victorian society, in a combination with folklore and supernatural elements which juxtapose to the setting withing the texts.
# Essay 3 - Conventions of the genre, Adaptations of the genre
## How the Vampyre does horror
- Monster evil beings - preface - talk about how society has always had monsters of different were-varieites, vampires are the werewolfs of aristocrats
- Bloodlust - intro paragraph
The Vampyre is considered one of earliest interpretations of vampires in how they are now considered within mainstream media. John Polidori's depiction of Lord Ruthven is one of the first depictions of the typical aristocratic, charismatic vampire that audiences are now familiar with in media. Up until this point, vampires had existed but rarely outside the bounds of folklore, where they remained more monstrous. Polidori's take on the vampire was to subvert audience expectations during a time where aristocracy was sought after, and the suave and charismatic of this subset of society were the most renowned. By juxtaposing this charming character with vampiric abilities and sinister motivations, Polidori was able to formulate a trope which would take advantage of audiences familiarities and expectations of society, and subvert it within it's narrative to create a juxtaposition that was emblematic of gothic horror.

Where modern text examples such as House of Leaves utilise the mechanics of the text alongside its narrative to betray readers trusts and illicit emotional responses to contradictory elements within the text, the Vampyre does this strictly with narrative elements that work in tandem with cultural contexts of the time. Using Lord Ruthven's status and charisma as a lure for audiences, demonstrating a character who was representative of a perfect gentlemen at the time, and having this effect be mirrored across characters in the text, invokes terror in readers when the truth is revealed in such a jarring execution. Lord Ruthven throughout the text uses his aristocratic charm as a lure to find victims and this same lure plays into relevant social expectations, creating a cathartic experience for readers at the time by subjecting them to the same bias's and pitfalls as the characters within the text do, and as such accomplish what House of Leaves does in its modern context, but through narrative themes and execution. 
## How Jekyll and Hyde does horror
- Monstrous society - 720-721 - talk about how this apaoclypse society where the plebs fear the magistrate is almost mirrored here through duality and how the true human nature fears the aristocratic mask
- Monsters evil beings - pg 4 - monsters as metaphors for human qualities, aggression and sexual sadism, id forces - jek and hyd are an example of where the monster does this and is also just human
- Character crisis - how these characters stand as representations of reactions to complex social etc. debates
The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde accomplishes something similar to the Vampyre but rather than using folklore as a device to invoke terror in the text, Robert Louis Stevenson manages to similarly allude expectations around societal norms at the time and deliver upon horror by highlighting the duality of human nature, a taboo notion of the time. Dr Jekyll similar to Lord Ruthven is situated as a prime example of an upstanding character within Victorian society, reinforced by his interactions with Gabriel John Utterson, the readers perspective throughout the text and a lawyer, presented to us as a trusted device to experience the text through. By using Utterson as a device of perception, Stevenson hinges much of the texts progression around the allure and fear of the unknown, at a societal level through the juxtaposition of association between Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde. By grounding the story within a realistic bounds, the effect of catharsis is increasingly felt especially so when the text hinges on the dual nature of people rather than a creature of folklore.

It is the themes and conventions explored in Dr Jekyll and My Hyde which allow it to invoke terror in such a convincing way. At the time in Victorian society, there was such a crux placed upon presentation and strict moral guidelines which suited those in well off positions at the time. This allowed for a strict line to be drawn between the wealthy, the poor, and anyone who didn't meet the strict criteria of aristocracy. In this way, those in positions of great social standing could tailor societies expectations of them. This caused a schism in morality, where how people were presented did not truly inflect their intentions or natures. This duality is core to the human condition in society, and at the time was deemed taboo to discuss. It is for this reason, that taboos and the unknown, paired with themes of duality, are core conventions of gothic literature which remain intrinsic to texts even now, despite the growth of society away from the strict conventions of the Victorian era. 
## Echoes of tradition into new contemporary literature
- Monsters on the brain, roots in darwinism, scared rat society
- The weird tale, page 1, not a genre, a consequence of a world view
- 
Upon the foundations laid by traditional gothic horror, modern texts such as House of Leaves and Bloodborne continue to implement these themes despite the growth and maturation of society and our consideration for contemporary art. By doing this, these texts have discovered newfound ways of invoking catharsis in neglect of societies distancing from the initial awe of gothic horror which manipulated perspectives and ideas around society and cultural history which hadn't been done before in written text. This shows an active metamorphosis in the horror genre which appears to both base itself upon the foundations laid by original gothic texts while also adapting to the maturing societal standards of contemporary art, evoking catharsis in continually innovating ways.

Both House of Leaves and Bloodborne utilise supernatural elements based in the realm of folklore and cosmic horror, but neither of these texts hinge on these elements to invoke horror rather than use them as devices to explore the human condition, and as such invoke catharsis through these explorations. The specificity around these facets of the human condition align similarly to what is explored in traditional gothic texts, the human mind facing something incomprehensible and the mental degradation that follows in the pursuit to comprehend what we cannot and the facing of tragedy caused by the bounds and pursuits of human cognition and the madness which can be caused through this. 
# Essay 4 - Psychological Evaluation, Patterns show Evolution
## Old Conventions, New Blood
- On Monsters page 4 - hard wired fear
- Supernatural horror lit lovecraft
- On Monsteres page 185 - innate understanding of human understanding...fragility and vulnerability
- Monsters on the brain - From the trivial to the sublime, fast decisions (including both survival and ethical decisions) are heavily biased by the emotional pathways that have been laid down by reward/punishment associations in our previous experiences.
- Weird Tale - page 11 - authors trying to convince us of the truth of their world, navidson is the same with his camera work
- 
The fear of the incomprehensible and of the unknown as something primal to human cognition, a survival instinct that warns of fear as a mechanism against unknown danger. In response to this, humans strive for order and predictability as a natural response to achieve mental closure. House of Leaves explores this through the presentation of the house from the very beginning of the text. The Navidson's first begin to realise something is awry with the house by discovering that the measurements on the inside and outside do not align, a factor which unsettles them as it shatters basic human comprehension of physics, denying both order and predictability within their home. Similarly, from the beginning of the text the continual distortion of the word house and the ever shifting format of the book denies readers a sense of order and predictability. Despite the changes to the house and changes to the text itself being minimal initially, it invites and exponentially increasing lust for closure and control that directs the downfall of its characters and readers, submitting both to the whims of the unknown and invoking increasingly primal fears as the house and text itself both become more alive and appealingly aware as the characters and readers delve deeper into it, naturally transforming that mechanism of fear against the unknown into a real response to a primal threat to our being and cognition.

The duality then of human curiosity with the fear of taboos and transgressions, and the tragedy and madness caused by these pursuits is another facet core to gothic and horror literature. Taboos are often distinguished by humans themselves like laws and moral codes, and transgressing against them is a crux often fuelled by pursuits for self-serving knowledge or power, and is often a path that leads to tragedy, mental isolation and madness. These are all conventions of gothic literature and can be identified across the texts in this study. House of Leaves presents this not exclusively through the exploration of the house, which in itself is a prime example, but in the mental degradation of Will Navidson's character. We learn that before the events of the narrative, Navidson was a war photographer who gained great fame and acclaim for a particular photo of a girl in a war torn area. While initially a pursuit of his, capturing the horrors of war, his character grapples with the weight of his actions having captured human suffering for commercial gain. This moment is a great contributor into the mental decline of Navidson, and while his actions did not spur this tragedy itself, it was his curiosity and pursuits as a photographer that grafted this tragedy for endless others to see. This is effectively mirrored with his exploration of the house later in the text, and demonstrates the ever increasing madness faced by those who attempt to challenge transgressions and abnormalities.

Bloodborne too accomplishes similar feats and like House of Leaves, utilises new mechanics of its medium to transcribe these conventions of gothic literature to audiences in a newfound execution of catharsis. Bloodborne's entire plot hinges on the discovery, exploration and implementation of taboo, unknown elements which transgress against society. Through the narrative devices of the old blood and insight, Bloodborne simultaneously explores both tragedy and madness resulting from the pursuits of humanity through the taboo and unknown. Bloodborne's world, heavily inspired by both gothic and Victorian conventions represents an aftermath of humanities pursuits of taboos and unknowns, with the beastly scourge acting as the tragedy caused by the old blood, and the nationwide madness and cosmic horrors being results of pursuit of forbidden knowledge. What allows Bloodborne to act as a truly cathartic experience is how the player is submerged into this already tarnished world, with the mechanics that revolve around conquering it further revealing the events that have already transpired, while endlessly encouraging the player to fall for the same pitfalls and pursue the same taboos and forbidden knowledge. In this way, the text offers a narrative and gameplay experience entrenched with conventions of gothic horror, which allow for newfound exploration in the wake of society becoming increasingly aware of these conventions.
## Societal response to conventions
- Monsters on the brain - People frequently underestimate the role of art and imagery in their own value convictions. Through artwork, such as Shelley’s _Frankenstein_, Hitchcock’s _Psycho_, King’s and Kubrick’s _The Shining_, artists convey moral visions and audiences can reflect on them, reject or embrace them, take inspiration from them, and otherwise be enriched beyond entertainment and catharsis. Good monster stories can transmit values to us by showing us examples of dignity and depravity without preaching or proselytizing. The horror we feel while watching or reading _The Walking Dead_ is matched only by the inspirational awe we feel at the heroic family members in the bleak drama.
- Contemporary Gothic - fragmented tradition, filters old formulas through echo chambers of modern preoocupation etc.
# Essay 5 - Horror now, calculated trajectory and impact of new ruptures
## Assess the growth from traditional Gothic Literature to now
- Apocolypse archetypes - point 3. - how religion predicts doomsday, relying on images - frueds placing desires before experience - the psyche consists of images - condition of imagery nature is therefore the key to accessing indiviudal and collective minds
- Embodied Visions - humanities and science as one, evolutionary-biological framework
## Identify what elements are driving these new ruptures
- Powers of Horror - page 11 - abjection are safeguards, primers of culture. The process of abjection is rebirth - bloodborne tie - house of leaves, abjection from the house
- Powers of horror - page 14 - loss lays the foundation of our being, abjection of self is the discovery of the object of want - imagining the object of want to understand abjection is signified through literature - catharsis
- Embodied Visions - film and embodiedness, the process of experiencing literature has process within our brains, catharsis baby
- Evolution of Horror Films, page 5, as religious beliefs changed, the supernatural become a realm of uncertainty and anxiety
## Overall evaluation, identifiable metamorphosis of the genre in response to societal evaluation

# [[FYP Draft 3]]  

