#fyp 

# Essay 1 - Introduction
## Mission Statement: Brief Overview of Horror and Supporting Texts

This thesis aims to explore the evolution of the horror genre across mediums, examining it with a focus on intertextuality in order to measure the genre's unique capacity to stimulate and evoke emotional responses in audiences through psychological means. This research displays how horror has maintained a unique relationship with the human psyche, with the capabilities of invoking deep-rooted, primal emotions through manipulation of specific medium conventions. Through the exploration of this, this thesis sets out to discuss how horror as a genre actively shapes societal anxieties, present in both early Gothic works and postmodern, contemporary interpretations. Through textual analysis, this research aims to prove how the medium itself is self-generative, evolving and reforming around the expectations of the collective consciousness generated by the medium itself.

In defining horror, we make associations between the genre and it's relation to human emotion. Stephen T. Asma draws this conclusion when defining horror in his chapter 'The Art of Human Vulnerability, Angst and Horror' where he locates the origin of the word from the Latin verb which means to "stand on end" and also identifies how horror is defined by both the genre itself, and the human emotion the genre is designed to invoke (Asma 183). The manipulation of conventions to invoke said emotion, is a facet of horror that can be identified in its roots, as the concept has evolved alongside the development of the mediums itself, and the social and cultural contexts of its audiences. 

This can be effectively identified through the continuous subversion of expectations, and shattering of audiences familiarities. This in tandem with the exposure to sublime concepts, are trends which occur to challenge human cognitions inherent want to comprehend the world around us. The genre has the mechanical capabilities of both exposing and exploiting humans vulnerabilities, and through intense, immersive utilisation of both narrative devices and mechanics of traditional mediums, texts are able to force memorable and lasting revelations on audiences which provide substance to the evolutionary growth of the genre.

Prior to literature, horror can be seen strewn across folklore of a variety of cultures. These folkloric interpretations of horror hinge on the existence of the supernatural and the projection of monsters to enforce morals and lessons. David D. Gilmore covers this in his book, 'Monsters: Evil Beings, Mythical Beasts, and All Manner of Imaginary Terrors', where he identifies that monsters, across cultures, act as metaphors for human qualities which society desires to externalize and vanquish (Gilmore 1-4). Death is commonly explored through folklore in tandem with this, with different mythos accounting their own interpretations of ghosts and the afterlife. This is revealing to the nature of humans, showing that across cultural boundaries there is a natural urge to comprehend that which we cannot, alongside the qualities of humans that society has come to reject. Exposure to the supernatural instils a sublime terror in people, whereas the exposure of rejected human qualities manifests inner frustration. The exploration of both of these can be seen in early Gothic literature, which became synonymous with divulging in the contradictions strewn across societal norms, alongside the introduction to the supernatural. This was done to invoke terror in audiences, oftentimes using pre-existing folklore in tandem with societal clauses, such as the birth of the vampire as we know it in contemporary literature, stemming from the original folkloric origins in combination with the juxtaposing aristocratic facets of Victorian society. 

Both narrative and psychological analysis of texts and their condition on the human psyche correlate with traditional human responses. This reveals how people enjoy horror as a controlled form of experiencing fears and thrills which we would naturally be opposed to in a realistic setting, or wouldn't experience otherwise. This relates to the concept of catharsis. Originating from Greek drama and philosophy, catharsis invites the notion that the psychological response which comes from fright allows for the release of stress, processing fear vicariously. This thesis aims to explore both modern and traditional gothic horror under this context, identifying specific ruptures and crux's of the genre which have evolved to provide cathartic experiences to the evolving cognition of human society. 

The core texts which this thesis aims to analyse each develop this concept of catharsis, in ways unique to their respective mediums and within the context of culture and society around the time of their release. Mark Z. Danielewski's 'House of Leaves' does so uniquely through the active physical metamorphosis of the book itself, a mechanic which works in tandem with its narrative to depict and invoke sublime terror, and the natural human responses to said terror. Similarly, 'Bloodborne', a horror video game developed by renowned studio and director, FromSoftware and Hidetaki Miyazaki, utilises gameplay mechanics to invoke the core themes of its narrative. This allows players to submerge themselves in a Gothic, Lovecraftian inspired text in a means only accessible through the medium specificity of video games. These contemporary examples of horror literature each utilise the mechanics of their mediums which audiences are accustomed to, and breaks these conventions in ways to invoke terror while also remaining intact and relevant to the narratives told in each of the texts. 

The breaking of conventions showed in these texts, is allowed through the initial development and familiarization of them through traditional Gothic texts. This thesis will be analysing John William Polidori's 'The Vampyre' and Robert Louis Stevenson's 'Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde' to highlight this. These texts do not greatly subvert the mechanical aspects of their mediums but rather subvert audiences expectations and understandings of societal conventions at the time to great effect, producing Gothic horror as a result. This method of juxtaposing audiences familiarities, and exposing dark truths in society, was core to early Gothic literature and as such reveals how catharsis was invoked at the time. Since the popularisation of horror through traditional early Gothic texts, the development of how authors induce catharsis to audiences has greatly adapted in response to an ever shifting audience. This can be identified in the design of both 'House of Leaves' and 'Bloodborne', and this thesis aims to analyse these design choices and identify how these modern bastions of the horror genre show exponential growth in horror as a genre and medium.

The proceeding analysis of these texts, reveal how the horror genre narratively challenges human cognition, in a nature which has developed across mediums over time. These traits which will be identified, reveal the varying nature of the exploration of horror and how traits originating from traditional literature have not altered but rather expanded since their conception. These traits of the genre, reveal much about human cognition and our natural responses to stimuli. Similarly to how Asma relates the emotion of horror to the genre, the traits of the genre are revealing to our emotional responses (Asma 183). Through identifying how these texts then invoke catharsis, this study will explore the limitations and complexities of the human mind, what it means to comprehend the incomprehensible and furthermore how authors are able to carve their narratives to invoke terror in texts. Danielewski does this throughout 'House of Leaves', distorting the fabric of the book itself in a way which both deceives readers and invites them to submerge into the terror the text encapsulates, teasing the unravelling of reality through its entirely unique and metamorphic narrative.
## Analysis of House of Leaves: a narrative analysis of sublime terror

Mark Z. Danielewski's, 'House of Leaves' is a horror text which quickly became renowned for its unconventional, multi-perspective narrative and unique physical design of the book itself. The narrative follows the Navidson family as they move into their new home at Ash Tree Lane, the father Will of which is a photojournalist. After some time living there, the family begin to notice unexplainable changes to the house, its dimensions altering slightly, new doors appearing, and rooms existing in impossible spaces. These changes continue to occur until a dark labyrinth spawns beneath the house, leading Will Navidson, assisted by his family and other affiliated characters, to begin to document the terror of the house.  

The initial terror of the text comes from this failure to comprehend the workings of the house itself. Asma continues in 'On Monsters' to identify an 'undeniable cognitive component to monster fear', elaborating that humans have an understanding of what is 'essential for human life' (Asma 184). He continues to explain how this causes fear when monsters blur this line, exhibiting features of both life and death. In 'House of Leaves' the house is an ambient, seemingly non-sentient anomaly, and while it doesn't form that stark juxtaposition between life and death, it's nature does defy logic, and disturbs humans natural understanding of physics while also 'transgressing the categories of animate and inanimate' as Asma puts it (Asma 184).

Where the complexities of the text begin to show is in the chronology of how it's narrative is told, as "The Navidson Record", the fictional movie made by Will Navidson about the house, is implied to have already been filmed and published within the fictional world of 'House of Leaves'. The reader then learns of the events of the filming at Ash Tree Lane through two additional perspectives. One of which is a blind old man named Zampanò, an enigmatic figure who analyses and creates a manuscript which breaks down the events of "The Navidson Record". Johnny Truant then is another perspective, a younger man who discovers Zampanò's manuscript and finds himself deep in the exploration of the text, fascinated by the horrors it reveals of the spatial anomalies which occur at Ash Tree Lane. 

The text itself uses physical properties of the medium to distinguish between these perspectives, utilising a continually changing font and typeface as the narrative shifts between characters. Johnny's story is told in a blog-post style, with a typewriter font, Zampanò's manuscript is depicted as a complex mess of notes riddled with footnotes while Navidson's perspective is captured through an atypical third-person narration, as if describing the events of the recorded film itself. This allows for a constantly shifting narrative which embraces ambiguity and curiosity, feeding the readers insights into the incomprehensible phenomenon which occurred at Ash Tree Lane, but through the perspectives of several characters who too, are attempting to comprehend it through their own respective mediums. 

Zampanò's academic accounting of events, Johnny's personal exploration and the third-person documentation of Navidson's experience allows for a multi-layered account of the narrative which reflects the labyrinthic nature of the house itself. Each character's own interpretation of events creates layers of depth in understanding said sublime phenomenon, which the reader never gets to experience first-hand without a buffer. This bewilders the reader, while in tandem encouraging them to comprehend the house alongside the multiple characters and perspectives which are offered up. This reinforces the incomprehensible nature of the house, which is then later reinforced by the metamorphosis of the book itself. 

German philosopher Martin Heidegger discusses the philosophy and existentialism that surrounds the concept of Being, in his book, 'Being and Time', and many of his revelations are relevant to the intentions behind 'House of Leaves' narrative. He argues on the basis of Greek philosophy that Being is 'the most universal and emptiest of concepts', yet despite being a concept so universal, harbours some of the darkest connotations (Heidegger 22-23). Being is a contradictory notion, as to understand anything roughly defined as an entity is to define Being also, and to do this, one must define the notion of Being within understandable logic and structure (Heidegger 25-26). Humans have done so throughout history, defining and applying our own logic to the world around us in order to answer the question of being. When something defies structure and logic as humans define it, that question of being becomes unearthed, and we see this actively occur throughout 'House of Leaves'.

We see terror unfold throughout the narrative as the Navidson's are left vulnerable and exposed to their own home, a space which should be defined by their presence, and what structure they apply to it. Yet the house moves and contorts by itself in a manner no house should, defying logic and disturbing the family deeply as they become mentally trapped by the torment the house implies. This experience is entirely mimicked by the text itself, which too defies the structure and logic predefined by readers, forcing readers into a mirrored experience of the Navidson's exploration of the house. This is enabled through the multi-layered perspectives of the text, which act as the readers sole interpretation of events. Similar to how the Navidson's are left exposed and vulnerable as the house begins to shift, readers too experience this as the trusted perspectives for which they interpret the story begin to shift too. Anywhere the word "house" is used, the font changes slightly, shifting off the line or altering type face. Strange messages lie within Zampanò's footnotes which progressively get more convoluted as the text drags on. These nuanced shifts within the text exponentially grow into a complete metamorphosis as Navidson and his assistants begin their expeditions into the dark labyrinth, where the pages begin to drastically alter in tandem with the changes to the house.  

H.P. Lovecraft defines the fear of the unknown as the 'oldest and strongest kind of fear' in his essay on 'Supernatural Horror in Literature' (Lovecraft 1). He goes on to write on how humans interpretations of the world were made in reference to the 'awe and fear' which surrounded them as they came to understand the environments they were born into, leading the 'unknown' and 'unpredictable' to being in separate spheres 'wherein we have no part' (Lovecraft 1). Analysing this analogy in comparison to Heidegger's definition of Being, reveals humans intrinsic need to define things by logic, and the primal fear which follows when we are unable. 'House of Leaves' hinges on this primal fear, with the continuous force which drives the narrative across perspectives being the constant attempts to both understand and define the house on Ash Tree Lane. This becomes increasingly prominent as the narrative see's the characters delve into the sprawling depths beneath the house on Ash Tree Lane, where the text invokes sublime terror the most.

The labyrinth beneath the house is continually described as an empty abyss of nothing, sometimes enormous in scale, other times claustrophobic, but always completely dark, logically incomprehensible, and occasionally echoed with the unrecognizable bellows of something within its walls. In S.T. Joshi's, 'A Dreamer and a Visionary', he reflects on what Lovecraft deems to be one of his earliest works, a story where 'a boy...overheard some horrible conclave of subterranean beings in a cave' (Joshi 25-39). Similar to this prose, the depths in 'House of Leaves' utilises fears of the unknown, and the visceral associations humans have with subterranean unknowns, and unrecognizable auditory phenomena. It is during these expeditions, that the text in 'House of Leaves' begins to mirror the house. During moments of empty expanse, the pages become more sparse, becoming filled with negative space. Words physically stretch across the page as the hallways elongate. Text flips upside down, margins become narrow, and the reading experience becomes a jarring reflection of the journey that Navidson and his crew take beneath the house. The more isolated the characters find themselves, the less words begin to fill the pages until the readers finds themselves reading a single word per page. This process of metamorphosis of the medium captures the sublime horror of the house perfectly as the readers exploration of the text becomes a complete reflection of the exploration of the house itself. Similar to how the house breaks conventions associated with that of a typical house, the text does this in the same way, breaking the conventions of books and assumptions of the reading experience in a way that both disorientates and terrifies the reader.
## Overview of catharsis: looking at the functions of the medium

This execution by Danielewski demonstrates a profound example of catharsis. The readers are submerged into the text with a false sense of security, as is the Navidson's with their home, Zampanò with "The Navidson Record", and Johnny with Zampanò's manuscript. Each with the intention of comprehending the initial enigmatic terror of the house. Through the metamorphosis and physical distortion of the text, readers experience the deep-rooted vulnerabilities shared with the characters within the narrative, and the unconventional layout of the text submits readers to the psychological disorientation akin to the Navidson's experience with the house and it's labyrinth. This distortion of text enables readers to experience the process undergone by the Navidson's, which would otherwise be impossible to replicate given the supernatural nature of the event. In this way, the narrative and mechanics of the medium are intimately connected and through the experience of catharsis, allows the terror to be replicated through the text itself.

Where 'House of Leaves' excels beyond normal executions of catharsis is in how it develops upon this by constructing its narrative around the punishment of morbid curiosity. Similarly to how the text breaks convention of its physical medium, the narrative also develops contradictory to the experience that the text invokes. Thus far, the text has mirrored the exploration of the house and other texts within the world of the narrative with the experience the reader is having. In doing this, the text encourages the readers to pursue it, offering the experience of catharsis as an active reward for partaking in the consummation of the text. In 'On Monsters', Asma recalls a research experiment of Darwin's which involved exposing monkeys to snakes. The research showed that while monkeys would react negatively and avoid as much as a stuffed snake, that when a live snake was placed within a bag, they took turns inspected the bag and fleeing (Asma 3). Despite seeing other monkeys' interaction with the snake in the bag, driven by curiosity, they each took turns in replicating this experience. A similar phenomenon can be seen encouraged throughout the reading of 'House of Leaves', with readers being exposed to the active consequence of pursuing morbid curiosity, yet being driven to pursue their own morbid curiosity within the text as a result.

Despite this encouragement, the narrative itself continually reinforces themes which contradict this incentive. The character of Johnny Truant is a prime example of this, as he is quite similar to the reader in that he has an outward perspective, looking inward at the happenings of Ash Tree Lane, his morbid curiosity driven by the contents of Zampanò's manuscript. The further Johnny pursues the contents of the manuscript, the more fractured he becomes as he faces implications both mental and physical. His life and relationships become tattered with crisis and he begins to hallucinate and gradually lose his grip on reality. Similarly, Will Navidson's downfall is spelled by his pursuit of the house's truths, and his insistence on documenting the house becomes less so about making the documentary and moreso about comprehending the enigmatic house itself, grounding it within his own logic. In Asma's journal entry, 'Monsters on the Brain' in 'Social Research: An International Quarterly', he discusses the underestimated role which art plays in peoples applications of values (Asma 953-954). He argues that texts play an important role in shaping viewers emotional responses, particularly to what he refers to as "terrifying trials" such as to "be put on the frontlines of some war, or be robbed...harassed and assailed", and other such occurrences which one would never hope to be exposed to (Asma 953-954). He goes on further to say that authors of texts have the ability to "convey moral visions" and therefore allow audiences to "reflect on them, reject or embrace them...and otherwise be enriched beyond entertainment and catharsis" (Asma 954). 'House of Leaves' feigns this truth, with Navidson portrayed as the vision conveying author, and Zampanò, Johnny and the reader therefore enriched by catharsis, yet actively contradicts this truth by punishing the characters who pursue it.

Navidson's end see's him returning to the house despite all warnings in a segment that descends him into near madness at the sheer exposure to the house, which he narrowly escapes. Whereas the other characters ends are either left ambiguous, or mentally shattered. Each of these characters are exposed to and are partially ruined by terror through catharsis by their respective devices throughout the narrative, such as "The Navidson Record's" effect on Zampanò, and his manuscripts effect on Johnny. With each character mirroring the readers experience, the readers device is the text itself through which they are continuously exposed to catharsis. The contradictory nature of the narrative both warns the reader of the pursuit of morbid curiosity, while simultaneously encouraging the pursuit of the text through the reward of catharsis. This simulates further disorientation, psychological distress and self-doubt within the reader. This is further reinforced by the first page of the text reading simply, "this is not for you" (Danielewski ix).    

The combination of layered perspectives and continual reinforcement of self-doubt is intrinsic to the development of the sublime, cosmic horror shown throughout 'House of Leaves'. In Gilmore's 'Monsters', he affirms that "monsters embody all that is dangerous and horrible in the human imagination", and by exposing the reader to multiple accounts of the events at Ash Tree Lane, the expanse of this imagined horror is effectively multiplied (Gilmore 1). Throughout 'House of Leaves', the reader is prompted through Johnny, Zampanò and additional perspectives to imagine the workings of the house on Ash Tree Lane. However, while the accounts of events at the house are formulated through what transpires on "The Navidson Record", said events are firstly depicted through Zampanò and his manuscript. With Zampanò being described as an older, blind man, this enforces further self-doubt into the imagining of the house as his depiction of "The Navidson Record" is through the assistance of his scribe. The motifs of the unknown are already continually reinforced throughout the narrative, through the physics defying nature of the house, the dark expanse of its depths and the pulsating, shifting nature within of its bowels. While both the reader and characters are continually prompted to image the physicality of the house, with Zampanò acting as the medium of description, the imagining of the house shifts into the realm of consciousness and interpretation. With so much of the houses physicality dependant on mental interpretation, self-doubt is the further reinforced as we consider Johnny's hallucinations and loss of grip on his own reality. In this way, the text becomes a self-generative stream of terror, where interpretation is the sole author of the subjected sublime horror. The distortion of the text then implies that said attempts to apply logic and structure to the house is intrinsically wrong, and the narrative continuously spells doom to those who attempt to. The instigator and source of this all being Navidson, the only character who attempts to physically capture the phenomenon through cameras, resulting in "The Navidson Record". However with Zampanò acting as the medium of which we learn of this, the film itself remains mysterious and enigmatic throughout the entire text.  
# Essay 2 - Intertextuality
## Analysis of Bloodborne: interplay of narrative and mechanics

This affiliation between protagonist perspectives, narrative contexts and the reader, in enforcing contradictory emotions is similarly done in 'Bloodborne', a Gothic horror video game developed by FromSoftware and Hidetaki Miyazaki. 'Bloodborne' is a third person, action-roleplaying game which is similar in style to FromSoftware's previous titles, the 'Dark Souls' series, known for crushing difficulty being intrinsic to the games mechanics, rewarding players through active progression and repetition. Like 'House of Leaves', 'Bloodborne's' narrative works in tandem with it's mechanics to instil contradictory emotions in the player throughout the text, reinforcing its Gothic horror elements. 'Bloodborne's' narrative revolves around many of the common conventions of Gothic literature; the interplay of supernatural elements, forbidden knowledge and the madness which comes in the pursuits of this. The game is set in the fictional city of "Yharnam", based off Victorian England, where a mysterious plague has transformed its population into beasts. The player, who is an unnamed hunter, is tasked with ridding these beasts while also discovering the layers of secrecy embedded into the games lore.

From the beginning of the game, an aura of mystery enshrouds the entire narrative, suggesting that the buried secrets of it's world are intended to remain buried. This is done through the games enigmatic opening, where the player is greeted with no clear objective. An optional note found at the beginning tells the player to "seek paleblood to transcend the hunt", an ambiguous instruction which means nothing upon first inspection. This unclear direction the game opens with is contradictory to typical video game formats, where players are often given clear incentives and motivations at the beginning of the game. This introduction to 'Bloodborne's' world is akin to the introduction of 'House of Leaves', where the first page reads "this is not for you" (Danielewski ix). This is further reinforced as the player begins the game with no weapons, facing difficult enemies in a sequence which expects the player to die. This mechanically warns the player against exploring the world, which is later reinforced by multiple characters throughout the text who advice against progressing further into the city, and warn against uncovering its secrets. The combination of both narrative and mechanical devices warning the player against progression, similarly to 'House of Leaves', displays active punishment for the pursuit of morbid curiosity.

'Bloodborne' continues to reinforce the contradictory nature of the text upon the first death of the player, wherein they are transported to the "Hunters Dream", a player hub where one can increase their strength and upgrade weapons. Here, the player meets one of the first notable characters of the game, Gehrman, an enigmatic figure who advises the player to not "think too hard about all of this. Just go out and kill a few beasts". With the Hunters Dream providing the player their first bit of welcoming respite, and first clear task or direction, it is implied to be a mechanically safe space. However, the gameplay loop which the Hunters Dream encourages, actively works against the player. In order to utilise the mechanics of the Hunters Dream, players must collect "Insight", a resource within the game that the player is told little about, yet is tracked with an indicator on the user interface, and holds a definite presence throughout the game. The player soon learns that Insight is gained passively, upon witnessing the terrors within the fictional world of the game. The first time a player discovers a boss, or other monstrosities, they gain Insight and gain further Insight as they kill these enemies. In addition to Insight, the player also earns "Blood Echoes", the main resource of the game which allows players to level up and strengthen their mechanical abilities. However, what presents itself as a core mechanical loop of the game, is actually intrinsic to the games narrative, as the pursuit of power through Blood Echoes and wisdom through Insight is thematically core to the narrative of the game.

In James O'Rourke's review of David Collings', 'Monstrous Society, Reciprocity, Discipline, and the Political Uncanny', he analysis elements of modern English political discourse which hold relevance to 'Bloodborne's' narrative. He highlights Collings's accounts of revolutionary discourse, where he argues that the representation of bodies in the late eighteenth century shifts within structural antagonism (O'Rourke 720). O'Rourke goes on to discuss defenders of the propertied class, like Edmund Burke, who "offers metaphorics of the body that casts the crowd as grotesque and the magistrate as divine, and renders high and low entirely irreversible" (O'Rourke 720-721). We see this representation of bodies mirrored within 'Bloodborne's' world and narrative. As the player explores the world, they learn the cause of the beastly scourge. The "Healing Church", an enigmatic corporation who retains a near omnipresence throughout the game, being the institution which employs hunters to rid the beastly scourge, are revealed to be the source of the plague. The player learns of scholars of the church who discovered a mysterious healing blood within labyrinths beneath Yharnam, and upon distributing this blood to the public would begin the beastly pandemic. Through this narrative consequence, we see the general populous turned to beasts, mirroring the sentiments of Burke which "casts the crowd as grotesque", while the Healing Church reflects the "magistrate as divine". (O'Rourke 720).

As a result, the Healing Church becomes a shadow antagonist of the player, despite being the main contributor of all mechanical means the player uses to progress. The weapons and upgrade mechanics utilised by the player, including the Hunters Dream itself, are all offspring's of the Healing Church. Like in 'House of Leaves', where the reader is warned against the pursuits of morbid curiosity by the narrative yet are encouraged to pursue their own curiosities through the reward of catharsis, 'Bloodborne' encourages the player to indulge in the mechanics offered by the Healing Church, despite the narrative spelling consequence for those same elements. This is further expanded upon with the Insight mechanic, and the further narrative exploration of pursuits of knowledge and resulting madness as core themes throughout 'Bloodborne'.

As the player progresses further into 'Bloodborne's' narrative, Lovecraftian elements begin to emerge. It is discovered that alongside the healing blood, the Healing Church also discovered enigmatic greater beings, referred to as "Great Ones", within the labyrinths beneath Yharnam. Great Ones within 'Bloodborne' are Lovecraftian inspired cosmic horror beings, exposure to which is revealed to instil people with otherworldly knowledge and power, referred to as Insight, but at the cost of madness and body metamorphosis. This discovery causes a schism in the Healing Church, with many of its members abandoning their morals with the obsession of ascension and becoming more intwined with Great Ones and their Insight. This reinforces themes of structural antagonism, further defining the Healing Church's reflection of the "magistrate as divine" and the concept O'Rourke discusses of societies "moral fear of the sublime" (O'Rourke 721). 

While the pursuit of Insight is clearly indicated to cause madness, and is representative of societies natural fears, the player is actively incentivised to increase their own level of Insight through gameplay mechanics. Insight is required to increase ones power through the levelling mechanic in the Hunters Dream, and Insight is also used a secondary currency to purchase items. Similarly, the player is encouraged to kill beasts, and consume their blood to gain power and healing, despite knowing the consequences of this process through knowledge of the beastly pandemic. Additionally, the Healing Church's conflict with the public is reflective of revolutionary conflict and the distinguishability between classes, where the player is forced to utilise the mechanics of the side which are portrayed as the antagonists. The constant contradiction between narrative and gameplay elements here, mirrors that of 'House of Leaves' and as a result, engulfs the game in a self-propagating cycle of pursuing forbidden knowledge and devices, despite constant warnings from the narrative.  
## Overview of contradictions: looking at the functions of collective consciousness

Both these texts develop upon the theory of catharsis through their respective mediums, utilising the mechanics of each alongside their narratives to both reward and discourage the cathartic experience they evoke. The contradictory nature of these narratives plays into the psychological responses of humans, utilising our natural allure to the unknown in contrast with our primal fear of danger. Asma discusses this concept in 'On Monsters' where he he highlights "the simultaneous lure and repulsion of the abnormal or extraordinary" as "an important aspect of our notion of monsters" (Asma 6). The paradoxical interplay here is core to the genre of horror, and both these texts utilise this factor through modern innovations of mediums to enhance the experience, in respect to our psychological responses and our comprehension of Gothic horror.

Within the chapter 'The Social Neuroscience of Prejudice' in David M. Amodio's 'Stereotyping and Prejudice', Amodio's research draws some notable conclusions about humans experience of empathy. The research reveals empathy to be a "multifaceted construct...that reflects our reactions to others' experiences and feelings" (Amodio 453). He goes onto express how experiencing an emotion as a reaction to another's emotion, engages the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, which is related to "the first-hand experience of pain and empathy for others", revealing how showing empathy is to emulate another's pain (Amodio 454). Additionally within this chapter, Amodio discusses semantic memory and the role of Pavlovian conditioning in fear stimuli (Amodio 447). When considering the importance of this in regulating humans fear stimuli, it is evident how process of relating readers catharsis to the experience of characters within a text such as 'House of Leaves', utilises our natural response to simulate others experience when conditioning empathy. Alongside the experience of catharsis, this conditions readers to exhibit similar fear stimuli of that which the characters exhibit. 

Chi-Ying Yu's article on 'The Appearance and Resonance of Apocalyptic Archetypes in Contemporary Disaster Films', discusses the repeated human want to portray doomsday conditions under our own prophecies (Yu 2021). They continue to examine how apocalyptic scenario's are present across religions as a "long-lasting human narrative" which aims to apply logic to the human experience (Yu 2021). As society has progressed to become more questioning, and literature and pop-culture have become facets to explore commonalities of the collective, apocalypse and disaster movies have become an increasingly sought after fad. Yu explores how over time, these films have become less about capturing disaster and moreso about capturing humans perception of disaster, using 'Cloverfield' as an example for its deliberate attempts to "insert a sense of authenticity with the use of...shaky shooting style, purposely placing the audience under an uncomfortable viewing situation" (Yu 2021). This reveals a commonality in simulating cathartic experiences across media, and in relation to humans connection to empathy and the role of Pavlovian conditioning in fear stimuli, further demonstrates how both 'House of Leaves' and 'Bloodborne' utilise this fact, through their contradictory implementation of the cathartic experience, to instil uncomfortable terror in audiences. 

Each of these texts subvert audience familiarities with both the genre of Gothic horror and the respective conventions of their mediums. This betrayal of narrative forms as such, unsettles audiences and the utilisation of jarring mechanical devices, empowers the feelings of unknown terror which both the texts evoke. In this way, the texts reflect an awareness of the collective consciousness of their audiences by purposely disposing traditions of their mediums. 'House of Leaves' does so through the metamorphosis of the text, forcing readers to consume the narrative in unconventionally ways such as having to physically read the book upside down, or through the hidden messages and ciphers scattered across the footnotes which actively distract from the core text. 'Bloodborne' similarly, punishes players for indulging in certain core mechanics, such as enemies becoming increasingly difficult with higher levels of Insight earned and certain areas becoming littered with environmental hazards in the form of giant cosmic horrors upon reaching certain levels of Insight. The utilisation of these juxtaposing elements within the texts works in tandem with audiences familiarities of conventions of said mediums. Similarly, traditional Gothic literature can be analysed under this lens, revealing how these texts too betray audience familiarities to instil terror. However these texts do so through narrative executions of social and cultural contexts rather than the mechanical alterations of the mediums themselves.







