
In this thesis, it is my aim to explore the evolution of the horror genre across mediums, in an attempt to measure its unique capacity to stimulate and evoke emotional responses in audiences through psychological means. Through my research, I believe that horror holds a particularly unique relationship with the human psyche, and has the capabilities of invoking deep-rooted, primal emotions and responses through manipulation of specific conventions of mediums. Through the exploration of this, I aim to discuss how horror as a genre actively shapes societal anxieties, present from early Gothic works to postmodern interpretations, and how as a medium its self-generative collective consciousness allows itself to evolve and reform as the expectations of the medium itself does. 

The manipulation of conventions to engage with audiences is a facet of horror that can be identified in its roots, and has since evolved in tandem with the developments of the mediums themselves, and the social and cultural contexts of audiences. This is effectively done through continuous subversion of expectations, and shattering of trusts and familiarities of audiences, and forced exposure to sublime concepts which challenge human cognitions inherent want to understand and comprehend the world around us. The genre has the mechanical capabilities of both exposing and exploiting human vulnerabilities, and through intense, immersive utilisation of both narrative devices and mechanics of traditional mediums, is able to force memorable and lasting revelations on audiences which provide substance to the growth curve of the genre.

Before literature, horror can be seen strewn across folklore of a variety of cultures. These folklore and mythological interpretations of horror often use supernatural and otherworldly entities to enforce morals and lessons. Death is most often explored through this, through interpretations of the afterlife, ghosts, demons etc. This reveals the human urge to comprehend that which we cannot, and this notion acts as a core aspect of horror throughout its evolution. Sublime terror is found when human cognition is forced to tackle something it doesn't comprehend, or something which contradicts what we do comprehend. In folklore we can see the primer with the exploration of death, and the latter is later found as Gothic literature explores contradictions to societal norms as a device to invoke terror in audiences, oftentimes using pre-existing folklore in tandem with this such as with the concept of vampires stemming from creature mythos combined with contradicting facets of aristocratic society.

Psychological studies of horror have definitively proven its effect on the human psyche, and the correlation it has with traditional human responses. These studies oftentimes find that people enjoy horror as it is a controlled way to experience fears and thrills which we would be opposed to in a realistic setting, or wouldn't experience otherwise. This relates to the concept of catharsis, a psychological term whose origins comes from Greek drama and philosophy, which invites the notion that the psychological response that comes with fright allows for release of stress, allowing the ability to process fear vicariously. It is this concept which this thesis aims to explore through the lens of modern horror mediums, with the intentions of identifying specific ruptures and crux's of the genre which has evolved both alongside and as a response to human cognition.

The core texts which I will be analysing each develop this concept of catharsis, in ways unique to their mediums and the social and cultural contexts of the times they were released. Notably, House of Leaves by Mark Z. Danielewski, does this incredibly uniquely through the active physical metamorphosis of the text, a mechanic that works in tandem with its narrative to depict and invoke sublime terror, and the natural human response to said terror. Similarly, Bloodborne, a video game developed by FromSoftware and directed by Hidetaki Miyazaki, utilises mechanical devices of the video game medium to invoke the core themes of its narrative, and allows players to submerge themselves in a gothic, Lovecraftian text in a means that can only be explored within the genre of video games. These modern examples of horror literature each utilise the mechanics of their mediums which audiences are accustomed to, and breaks these conventions in ways which invoke terror in audiences while also remaining intact and relevant to the narratives told in each of them. 

The breaking of these conventions is allowed through the initial development and familiarization of them which stem from Gothic horror texts such as the Vampyre by John Polidori and The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde by Robert Louis Stevenson. While these texts do not greatly subvert the mechanical aspects of their mediums, they do subvert audiences expectations and understandings of conventions in society at the time to great effect to produce horror. This method of juxtaposing audience familiarities to expose dark truths in society, was a core theme across much early gothic literature, and as such reveals how catharsis was perceived and executed upon at the time. Since the popularisation of horror through early gothic works, the way in which authors have developed texts to continue to invoke catharsis in an ever expanding and adapting audience market is intrinsic to the design behind both House of Leaves and Bloodborne, and this thesis aims to break these design choices down and identify how they are modern bastions of the horror genre, and evidence to its exponential growth as a genre and medium.

It is evident through the analysis of these texts, that the horror genre is a result of narrative challenges to human cognition which has developed over the course of many years and many mediums. Despite the primitive or complex nature of these varying degrees of horror exploration, there are core traits which have never been replaced but rather expanded upon as we have adapted to the literature interpretations of horror. These traits reveal more about human cognition and our natural emotional responses moreso than tropes of any medium, and it is the aim of this thesis to further explore these ruptures and to develop them to allow a greater understand of our comprehension of horror, and what it reveals about the limitations and complexities of the human mind, and what it means to comprehend the incomprehensible, and furthermore how authors are able to create such texts, through narrative tools which allow them the ability to invoke terror in audiences regardless of scope or measure. House of Leaves does this throughout its narrative, and distorts the medium of books in a way which both deceives readers and invites them to submerge into the terror the text encapsulates, teasing the unravelling of a reality through its entirely unique and metamorphic narrative. 

House of Leaves by Mark Z. Danielewski is a horror text which quickly became renowned for its unconventional, multi-perspective narrative and unique physical design of the book itself. The story follows the Navidson family, the father Will of which is a photojournalist as they move into a new home at Ash Tree Lane. After some time living there, the family begin to notice otherworldly changes to the house, its dimensions altering slightly, new doors appearing, and rooms existing in impossible spaces. These changes continue until a dark labyrinth spawns beneath the house, and Will Navidson, assisted by his family and other characters, begins to document the terror of the house.

Where the complexities of the text begin to show is in the chronology of how this story is told, as The Navidson Record, the movie made by Will about the house, already has been filmed and published within the fictional word of House of Leaves. The reader learns of the events of the filming of Ash Tree Lane through two additional perspectives, a blind old man named Zampanò who analysise and creates a manuscript breaking down the events of the Navidson Project, and Johnny Truant, a younger man who discovers Zampanò's manuscript and finds himself deep in the exploration of the text, fascinated by the horrors it holds and the spacial anomalies of Ash Tree Lane.

The text itself uses the physical means of the medium to distinguish between these perspectives, with the font and typeface shifting between different protagonist perspectives, Johnny's story being told in a blog post style typewriter font, Zampanò's manuscript depicted as a complex mess of notes riddled with footnotes and Navidson's perspective captured through atypical third person narration as if describing the events of the recorded film. This allows for a constantly shifting narrative which embraces ambiguity and curiosity, feeding the readers insights into the incomprehensible phenomenon that is the house on Ash Tree Lane, but through the perspectives of several characters who too are attempting to comprehend it through their own respective mediums.

Zampanò's academic accounting of events, Johnny's personal exploration and the third person documentation of Navidson's experience allows for a multi-layered account of the narrative which reflects the labyrinthic nature of the house itself while each character's own interpretation of events creates layers of depth to understanding a sublime phenomenon which the reader never gets to experience without a buffer. This bewilders the reader, while in tandem encouraging them to comprehend the house alongside the multiple characters whose perspectives are offered up, which reinforces the incomprehensible nature of the house itself which is then reinforced by the metamorphosis of the book itself. 

Throughout the text, we see terror unfold as the Navidson's are left vulnerable and exposed to their own house, a space which should be accommodating of them, yet moves and contorts by itself in a manner no house should, disturbing them deeply as they find mentally trapped by the torment the house invokes. This is entirely mimicked by the text itself, forcing the readers into a mirrored experienced of the Navidson's exploration of the house. This is allowed for as the readers sole interpretation of events is through the trusted perspectives provided by the text itself, but this trust is stripped slowly from the reader as you progress through the text. Anytime the word house is used, the font changes slightly, shifting off the line or out of the type face. Strange messages lie within Zampanò's footnotes which progressively get more convoluted as the text drags on. These nuanced shifts within the text exponentially grow into a complete metamorphosis as Navidson and his assistants begin their expeditions into the dark labyrinth.  

Where the sublime terror of House of Leaves shows itself most prominently is in the expeditions into the procedurally spawning depths beneath the house on Ash Tree Lane. This labyrinth is continually described as an empty abyss of nothing, sometimes enormous in scale, other times Closter phobic, but always pitch dark and incomprehensible. It is during these expeditions, that the text within House of Leaves begin to mirror the house. During moments of empty expanse, pages become more sparse, becoming filled with negative space. Words physically stretch across the page as the hallways do. Text flips upside down, margins become narrow, and the reading experiences becomes a jarring reflection of the journey that Navidson and his crew take beneath the house. The more isolated the characters find themselves, the less words begin to fill the pages until readers find themselves reading a single word per page. This metamorphosis of the medium captures the sublime horror of the house perfectly as the readers exploration of the text itself becomes a reflection of the exploration of the house, and in a similar vein to how  the house breaks all conventions associated with a house in an incomprehensible way, the text does the same, breaking conventions of the medium of books in a way that both disorientates and terrifies the reader.

This execution demonstrates a profound example of catharsis. The readers are submerged into the text with a false sense of security as is the Navidson's into their home, Zampanò into the Navidson Record, and Johnny into the manuscript, each with the intention of comprehending the initial enigmatic terror of the house. Through the metamorphosis and physical distortion of the text, readers experience the deep-rooted vulnerableness that the characters in the narrative do, and the unconventional layout of the text submits readers to psychological disorientation akin to the Navidson's experience with the house and its labyrinth. This distortion of the text enables readers to experience the process undergone by the Navidson's, which is otherwise impossible to replicate due to its incomprehensible nature. In this way, the narrative and the mechanics of the medium are intimately connected and through the experience of catharsis, the terror of the narrative is replicated through the text itself.

Where House of Leaves excels beyond normal executions of catharsis is in how it develops upon this by constructing the narrative around the punishment of morbid curiosity. Similarly to how House of Leaves breaks convention in the physical distortion of its medium, its narrative also develops contradictory to the experience the text invokes. Thus far, the text has mirrored the exploration of the house and texts within the world of the narrative and the experience the reader is having, and in doing this the text encourages the reader to pursue it, invoking that sense of catharsis as a means for readers to experience that which they could never experience under usual circumstances. However, the narrative itself continually reinforces themes which contradict this sentiment, and spell disastrous consequences to those who do. The character of Johnny Truant is a prime example of this, as he is quite similar to the reader in that his perspective is outward looking, driven by morbid curiosity through Zampanò's manuscript. The further Johnny's pursues the contents of the manuscript, the more fractured he becomes as he faces implications both mental and physical. His life and relationships become tattered with crisis and he begins to hallucinate and slowly lose his grip on reality. Similarly, Will Navidson's downfall is spelled by his pursuit of the houses truths, and his insistence on documenting the house becomes less so about making the documentary and moreso about comprehending the enigmatic house itself. Navidson's end see's him returning to the house despite all warnings in a segment that sees him descent into near madness at the sheer exposure to house to which he narrowly escapes. In both these cases, the characters which mirror the readers experience through catharsis are deeply psychologically punished for their pursuits of morbid curiosity, with their respective devices being the manuscript and the house acting as devices to represent this. In the readers case, the device is the text itself, and the contradictory nature of the narrative warning the reader to not pursue their own morbid curiosity, despite simulating catharsis, and despite completing reading a book being a core objective and aspect of the medium, stimulates fragmented intentions with the readers creating even more psychological distress and self-doubt. This is initially stimulated by the first words of the text reading, this is not for you.

The combination of layered perspectives and continual reinforcement of self-doubt is intrinsic to the sublime, near cosmic horror demonstrated throughout House of Leaves. The readers motivations and perspective are firmly aligned with the character of Johnny, being the most present account of events in the chronology of the text and being the listed author of the introduction in the text. Throughout House of Leaves, the readers are prompted through Johnny and the other perspectives to imagine and comprehend the enigmatic house on Ash Tree Lane. However, while the depictions of the house are formulated from the events that transpose within the Navidson Record, said events are depicted firstly through the manuscript of Zampanò who is a older, blind man. The consequences of this is fuelled by the already enforced self doubt of the text, that everything the reader is picturing which is already incomprehensible, is through the depiction of someone who cannot see. Already throughout the text is repeated motifs of the unknown and unfamiliar. The physics defying nature of the house, the empty black void of sight within its labyrinth, the breathing like pulsating roars from its bowels. These motifs continually invite both the readers and characters to attempt to comprehend the horror behind it all, with no real substance to implement this. With Zampanò acting as the medium, the physical manifestation of the house develops only through the realm of consciousness, which becomes furthermore distorted as we consider Johnny's hallucinations. In this way, the text becomes a self-generative stream terror, where interpretation is the sole contributor to transcribing the sublime horror of the house to the physical medium of text. The distortion of the book then implies that this attempt to make sense of it all is intrinsically wrong, and the narrative spells doom to those who attempt it, with the instigator and source of it all being Navidson, the only character who attempts to physically capture it with cameras, resulting in the Navidson Record, which remains mysterious and enigmatic throughout the text.
