#assignment 

# Structure

- Introduction to Pat Armstrong, his journal and photo album
- Context for his time serving, the battle of Gallipoli
- Contents of the journal and album, what context they give
- Significance of this, and his legacy

The journal and photo album of Captain William Maurice 'Pat' Armstrong documents his day by day experience's throughout his time overseas during the Battle of Gallipoli. Pat Armstrong like many others before him in his family joined the military and reached the rank of Captain in the 10th Royal Hussars. He served in India and joined the Expeditionary Force when the First World War broke out. His daily journal entries, supported by his photos, shows his journey in the 29th Division throughout the Battle of Gallipoli, beginning in his early stationing at Le Miette in France and covering his journeys across sea's to Greece, Gully Beach and other pivotal locations that forces were stationed at throughout the Gallipoli campaign.

The journal itself is pocket sized, with a green leather backed cover. 'Collins' Handy Diary' was made for 1915 and the first few pages list important days and holidays, calendar's as well as useful charts for stuff like sun rising and setting, postal services, foreign money exchange rates, foreign timetables and includes a coupon for £1000 accident insurance. Pat's entries themselves track his day by day activity, marking where he was writing from each day, who he spent time with and what they were ordered to do. The photo album then is a larger, red leather backed book, with Pat's photos lining the pages with brief descriptions beneath them.

Pat's entries give us insight into his daily activities. In one of his first journal entries in Le Miette he accounts going for a ride with the general, accounting who they met and were looking for that day, and talking of how the general, who he often writes as 'g' or 'gen', showed him the horses. Entries such as this gives us a picture of Pat's daily routine, and who he was well aquatinted with within the 29th Division. The general is oftentimes mentioned, and Pat spends a lot of time in the generals company, going for rides around their camps and meeting other members of the Division. He documents whenever he is sick and recovering also, writing how he stays in bed after waking with a chill. As well as his personal interactions and well being, Pat accounts factors such as the weather often commenting that it 'rained hard' and a 'rough night' or oftentimes describes the weather as a 'glorious day'. All these daily notes make for an immersive read, and contextualises a lot of the mundane every day experience, experience by him and other soldiers within the 29th Division.

Across the contents of both the journal and photo album, we can attain an idea of Pat's journey through the Gallipoli campaign. His journal accounts his early time in France, before departing on the H.M.S Imogen, a battleship belonging to the royal navy, to Athens in Greece and later Suvla bay, one of the pivotal landings of the Gallipoli campaign. Across these ventures, his entries describe noticeable arrivals of forces both enemies and allies, such as when he writes about the arrival of the 5th Army or the 5th Cavalry Division, which he shorthand's to the '5th Cav Div.' As the fight begins, he writes of when there is shelling during the day or night and notes active casualties or orders they are assigned. This allows us to form a chronology of Pat's time overseas, and this is supported further by the photo collection in his album.

The first collection of photos within the album show Pat's boarding of the H.M.S Elephanta, another military vessel. He captures many photos of the Italian soldiers who were with them and the French natives and troops there. Pat's photos show a great collection of sea vessels, and displays the military force of the royal navy at the time. His photos show off the different places along his expeditions, such as Port Said and Gully Beach. His collection of images from Gully Beach shows off the tents, camps, cookhouse's, horse lines and many other facilities they had established for the allied forces. As the fighting draws nearer, photos of shells bursting, men in trenches and the assortment of guns and machinery used on the war for both sides. This photos gives us a perspective onto the war effort which reveals the conditions for soldiers the likes of Pat. 

Having access to such a resource as Pat's journal and photo album allows us to understand the daily lives of soldiers and what it was like being dispatched overseas. Pat's daily entries let us follow his routines and supported by the photo's in his album, we get to see all the sights he saw during his time on the Gallipoli campaign, and gain a greater understanding of the allies war effort as a result. Pat was awarded a military cross for his efforts in 1916 for his service and would later die in service in 1917 to a sniper shot while in the trenches in France. These artefacts belonging to him allows his legacy to live on, and through his photos and daily writings, we not only get insight into the life of a soldier at the time but we get to relive and imagine the once in a lifetime experience had by Pat throughout his travels.


