#assignment 

The Coote family were prominent figures throughout early developing Ireland as far back as 1621 where Sir Charles Coote was granted baronetcies and then founded the town of Mountrath, county Laois, in 1628. Through this, the Coote family became landlords over many lands and towns within Laois and would later come to purchase the Ballyfin estate, acquiring Ballyfin house in 1813.   

The aims of this project is to examine the relations between class and estate management, how the Coote's service to the crown affected their position within Irelands landowning hierarchy, and how this in tandem with the Laois/Offaly plantations led to the development of towns such as Mountrath and Maryborough (now Portlaoise).

The Cootes will remain the focal point of this examination, with both their affiliation and work on the Ballyfin estate, and their management of the towns of Mountrath, Maryborough and surrounding areas being observed. Through this observation and analysis, this project hopes to look at the Coote's class relations and the dynamic between themselves, the tenants and residence of their owned lands. In doing so, we will examine the influence the Cootes had over both Ballyfin house and the lands in and around Maryborough, how these influences affected tenants and what legacy remains today. 

Many towns and lands in Ireland owe their initial modernisation and development to the external influence of Britain. While the Laois/Offaly plantation was not as extensive as the likes of the Munster or Ulster plantation, it still bears notable impact on the growth of towns within these counties. This project aims to highlight the significance of this dynamic, specifically by looking to the Cootes- who were awarded their baronetcies and land titles for service to the crown in the Nine Years War and later for their support of the Act of Union. 

The Coote family entered the hierarchy of Irish landowners through Sir Charles Coote, who was awarded one of the first baronetcies in Ireland after his service in the Nine Years War. This led to him becoming the first Earl of Mountrath, a title which would pass down through the Coote lineage until 1802. The title was dissolved then, making Charles Henry Coote the 7th and final Earl of Mountrath. However, the family would retain the title of Baron Castlecoote, which they were awarded for their support of the Act of Union. This notably would be passed to distant cousin Charles Coote in Dublin who would also inherit the 7th Earls properties. 

The Cootes affiliation with Ballyfin would come later, acquiring Ballyfin in 1813 from William Wellesley-Pole. The Cootes set about restoring Ballyfin on a much larger scale, building Ballyfin house in the 1820's with the help of Irish architects Sir Richard and William Morrison. The house became the domicile for the Cootes and would become widely acknowledged as one of the significant examples of nineteenth century neo-classical architecture in Ireland. The Cootes retained ownership of Ballyfin until the 1920s as Irish Independence spelled the downfall for Big House culture. Ballyfin house was purchased by the Patrician Brothers, who until 2002, ran a school from the estate. Now, after an ambitious restoration project, Ballyfin house remains as a five star luxury hotel.

Evidence of the Cootes estate management of Mountrath, Maryborough and other surrounding lands comes in the form of the Coote papers; a collection of deeds, letters, administrative notes and land settlements from mostly the 1800s-1900s. Analysing these papers grants us insight into many aspects of estate management, from the mundane, rudimentary reports of damaged facilities like roofs and piping, to the settlements of lands surrounding what is now Portlaoise, to the development of certain streets and roads within these lands. There is an extensive array of information within this archive which uncover details onto the financial side of estate management that will allow us to survey the Cootes influence over these areas, the dynamics between themselves and their tenants and what lasting effects their developments have on the legacy of these towns.

Ultimately, this projects hopes to analyse the Cootes involvements in both the Ballyfin estate, and the lands in and surrounding Mountrath and Maryborough. It is with the intention that this analysis will help shed light and identify the importance of these external influences on the development of Irish towns and estates, and will reveal insight on how these developments affect the locality and the legacy in and surrounding these lands.  

# [[HI4168 Project Draft 1 Prep]] 