#assignment 

The trajectory of socio-economic developments seen in Laois or, Queens County, in Ireland throughout the 19th and 20th century are intrinsic in marking the importance of the landed estate and moreover the significant impact of landownership in Ireland throughout this era. Subjected to the socio-economic challenges of this period, the lands within Queens County underwent significant developments throughout this time, which can be held accountable to the commitments and efforts of Charles Coote, and the rest of the Coote family. The mark left by the Coote family, and particularly Baron Castlecoote, Charles Henry Coote, is part of the prominent legacy of towns such as Mountrath, and what was then Maryborough and now Portlaoise. Alongside this, the Cootes legacy can be acknowledged from their ongoing patronage to the locality, as well as the maintenance and observable evolution of the Ballyfin house and estate. 

Much of this legacy can be held accountable to Charles Henry Coote (1794-1864) whose visionary dedication can be observed across the Ballyfin estate, which crafts a historical narrative that tells of both the amalgamation of rich cultural heritage for the area alongside the legacy of the family itself. Charles Cootes commitment to the families landed interests can be held accountable for much of the infrastructural improvements to Mountrath, Maryborough and surrounding areas. The same can be said for the investment and betterment of the Ballyfin estate, whose infamous legacy of being one of the great remaining neo-classical Irish houses can be entrusted to the dedication oversaw by Charles Coote and his family. In tandem with the Coote's involvement in politics, representing Queens County in parliament, we can account for much of these 19th century socio-economic developments to the success and dedication of Charles Coote, his family and descendants.

The history of the Coote families integration and ownership of lands in Queens County dates back to Sir Charles Coote (1581-1642) who was awarded for his service to James I in the Nine Years War, with baronetcies in Queens County. This acquisition led to the founding of the town of Mountrath in 1628 and the birth of the title Earl of Mountrath, which would pass through Sir Charles Cootes descendants until 1802, with the death of Charles Henry Coote, the 7th and final Earl. Charles Henry Coote was educated in Trinity College, Dublin and would later represent Queens County in parliament resulting from the landed interest his father had built up in the county. During his time in parliament, Charles Henry would support the Act of Union, and through this would be rewarded with both the colonelcy of the Queen's County Militia and later the title Baron Castlecoote which would pass to his cousin, Charles Henry in 1802. During this time that Charles Henry represented the county in parliament, his brother Eyre Coote who had joined the army since his education in Trinity, would garner increasing fame and fortune during his time serving as a general in India. After the death of Charles Henry, the Queen's County estates and near 50,000 acres was inherited by Charles Henry Coote, son of Chidley Coote of Killmallock, Limerick. Charles was 10 years old upon inheriting these lands, but upon coming of age in 1813, he was able to access the accumulating wealth of the estate, which coincided with the sale of the Ballyfin estate from the Pole family. With the Ballyfin estate being located centrally within the Cootes 50,000 acres, it was the perfect opportunity for the family to erect a demesne appropriate of their holdings, an objective sought out by Charles Henry who concurred that the family had left no architectural brand upon their estate which they had developed quite the landed interest in.

The history of the Ballyfin estate itself spells a series of different owners, each encountering their own trials in managing the estate. Looking at the history of flux and difficulty faced by the previous owners of the estate, highlights the commitment and work done by Charles Henry Coote and his descendants in both the improvement and general management of the Ballyfin house and estate. The flux of landowners affiliated with Ballyfin can be attested initially to the Tudor conquest of Ireland, with the Tudor government hosting ideals of both conquest but also with intentions to impose Protestant ownership of many lands, notably Laois and Offaly which were both planted during this period. During medieval times, the O'More clan claimed the area and would remain in power for some time due to the support of sub-divided locality until the force of the Tudor conquest eventually weakened the clans power. The ownership of the estate would fall to the Crosby family, and due to lack of evidence there is not much elaborated on the extent of their influence on the estate aside from raising the house to stronghold level of fortification until having to forfeit the property during the ushering of Cromwell's Commonwealth, as a result accusingly straying from Protestantism. It is during this ascendency of Protestantism that the Pole family, that of the Duke of Wellington, would come into ownership of the estate and would see the projection of developments that would lead Ballyfin to becoming the notable demesne which Charles Coote would acquire interest in, in 1813.

Between the 19th and 20th centuries, the Coote family both garnered their own fame and fortune while also overseeing and installing significant infrastructural developments to Queens County. These developments would importantly define the areas economic and social infrastructure, and highlight the Cootes family landed interest in the county during a period where many rich landowners were returning to England upon the Act of Union. The Coote papers archival collection showcases a plethora of deeds and leases which reveal how the Cootes distributed land and under what terms. One lease made out to John Hawkesworth demonstrates the nature of these land distributions. The lease allocates ownership of lands which is now referred to as Coote street, signifies neighbouring holdings in relation to the properties boundaries, and listing its dimensions as "140 feet in front, 17 perches deep and 9 perches broad". The lease itself offers rent of £5 payed in biannual instalments, which are set to November and May in alignment with agricultural cycles, and the lease itself is renewable perpetually showcasing a commitment to allowing stability and long-term development. Further leases showcase similar practices, with Charles Coote distributing "2 acres, 1 rood and 25 perches" to William Roe, a Mountrath merchant, "11 acres...East by the river of Mountrath" to Queens County farmer Fintin Wallis and "8 acres 2 roods and 23 perches" combined with another set of holdings amounting to "15 acres 12 perches" of surveyed land out to John Long. These leases showcase the Cootes distribution of land and allocation of infrastructure in Queens County as well as an awareness for the farming trade and practices of locality. This awareness can be further highlighted through an improvement survey drawn up by Charles Coote to observe the agricultural and manufacture practices of Queen's County in 1801. This survey accounts for the state of the land itself, the different modes of agriculture and markets, the size and nature of pastures and farms and general observations of population, their wages and the number of villages and towns. In addition to observing the agricultural infrastructure, the survey also accounts for the state of education, schools, charitable institutions, general prices, towers and castles and accounts of previous surveys of the county. These efforts by the Cootes demonstrate an awareness of the socio-economic developments surrounding the infrastructure in Queens County, a testament which would stand to the family upon their acquisition of Ballyfin, where particularly Charles Henry Cootes will to improve would translate onto the demesne as the family would see to its evolution over the years of their ownership. 

The Cootes commitment to long form improvements upon their estates wherein their landed interest applies, is encapsulated entirely by their developments to the Ballyfin house and estate. After acquiring the estate in 1813, Charles Henry Coote and his family were determined for the area to become a vista within their owned lands and a testament of the families ambition. This effort is most visible in their decision to remodel the house, after concurring that the renovations made by the Poles and previous owners was grand but lacked magnificence. After a failed attempt at reconstruction, father and son Richard and William Vitruvius Morrison, the same architects behind many great Irish country houses such as Fota house in Cork, were commissioned. The initial failure of architect Dominick Madden proved costly, and it took as much as Sir Charles Coote to sell the town of Jamestown, which the Cootes had founded in Leitrim in 1622, to finance the new operation. This highlights the commitment by Charles Coote in overseeing the improvement of his estates, a commitment which would later be echoed in ambitious restoration attempts, in acknowledgement of the past dedications to the house. Further evidence of the families commitment can be observed through the upkeep of the extensive gardens of Ballyfin, ensuring that both the house and its wider demesne oversaw refinement as proof of the families ambitious commitment to the land.

This sentiment of ambitious commitment is reflected through the Cootes positive relations and affiliation with the staff and locality of Ballyfin and their owned estates. This is evident through the many accounts of staff of Ballyfin who have have remembered generations of Cootes as being good fair landlords. In Charles Coote's will, all staff were rewarded for their service while also entrusted to collaborate and care for the estate in his absence. Sir Charles Henry Coote would be buried at Ballyfin, and Ballyfin church would erect a memorial which refers to him as a "constant worshipper...and benefactor" to the church. This highlights the Coote's affiliation with the locality in contrast to the absenteeism recognised by many English landowners and previous generations of Coote's. The team employed at Ballyfin house by the Cootes can be seen in many photos of the time, integrated and photographed with the Cootes themselves, displaying the relationship had between land owner and worker at Ballyfin.

Following the period of ownership the Coote's would oversee at Ballyfin, the estate would transition through several states of ownership and restoration, each with respect to the Cootes wishes and legacy.  In the wake of the 20th century, with Ireland finding itself striving for independence, it was seen fit that Ballyfin could no longer be upkept. Ralph Algernon Coote, 13th Baronet, would go on to sell the property but would insist the demesne not be divided, as to upkeep the legacy of the estate in respect to the commitment seen to it by the family. This would lead to the Patrician Brothers acquisition of the estate, to which it would become a school in 1923. Under the care of the Patrician Brothers, the estate would initially see the same maintenance as it did beneath the Cootes, with the gardens cultivated, lands managed and filled with livestock, while the inside of the property saw the merging of rooms to create dormitories and classrooms. While aware of the historical significance of the house, and in a conscious effort to preserve Ballyfin as it was transcribed by the Cootes, economical demands proved both costly and difficult for the Patrician Brothers who would announce the closure of the school in 2001. 

It wouldn't be until a year later in 2002, when Fred and Kay Krehbiel would come into ownership of Ballyfin. The couple had sought after landscape designer Jim Reynolds with the mission of transforming an Irish country house into a luxury hotel, which aligned ideally with the campaign led by the Irish Georgian Society to restore Ballyfin. What would result of this would be a nine year restoration project led by several individuals passionate for the restoration of the landmark, in accordance with the initial vision of Charles Henry Coote and his descendants. Individuals involved included the 15th Baronet Sir Christopher Coote, Desmond FitzGerald of the Knights of Glin, John J. O'Connell who had led the project to restore Fota house made by the same architects, Brother Maurice Murphy of the Patrician Brothers who was too committed to the legacy of restoration of the house and many others all with the aligned interested of restoring Ballyfin to it's envisioned legacy. Resulting from this was the ultimate restoration and elevation of the Ballyfin demesne to a level of grandeur not possible without the collaborated commitment of individuals who held  the estate in the same prominence of that which Charles Henry Coote and his descendants did. Ballyfin now remains as a landmark of culture and heritage within Laois, and is recognised by the locality as a bastion of the county's history with many families becoming integrated into the properties complex history through affiliation with either the Cootes, the Patrician Brothers or the restoration project itself. 

Charles Henry Coote, his family and descendants' legacy can be observed throughout both the history and infrastructure of Laois and their nature as ambitious, committed landowners is highlighted through the legacy of restoration which follows the Ballyfin estate, as well as their remembrance by the locality. The Coote's proactive involvement in both the political and infrastructural development of Queens County throughout the 18th and 19th centuries shows both an awareness and commitment to the socio-economic trajectory of the counties development, and the same sentiments can be reflected through their ongoing maintenance of the Ballyfin estate. Recognised by many, it is clear that Charles Henry Coote unlike many English and Protestant lords at the time deferred from the notions of absenteeism and took pride in the families landed interest of Queens County, reinforcing this through the establishment of Ballyfin house. Upon analysis, it becomes clear how much of the Cootes legacy is owed to Charles Henry Cootes initial motivations, and it appears his sentiments translated through both his will and character to those who would follow. Ultimately, the influence of the Coote family can be observed throughout both Laois and Ballyfin, and their dedication as landowners is embedded into the socio-economic development of Laois and its history.  