#assignment 

Across history, we can witness a general evolution of film and cinematography accountable for the social and technological advancements which have allowed the medium to grow. However, the trajectory of film has not been a linear history, and there are many factors and ruptures which can be held accountable for significant advancements in film. With this in mind, the examination of periods of global warfare and its effect on the evolution of film reveals major advancements in both technology and the thematic capabilities of film. Additionally, the use of film throughout war saw a shift in how films were targeted at audiences, with film becoming a common tool to quell nations worries during times of war, spur nationalistic ideals and distil propaganda. These however, are just the immediate effects the wars had on film, and through further examination we can view how the latent effects of war progressed film as a platform, ushering in periods of experimentation with film. This would allow for film to be used for whole new explorations of ideas such as reflection and reconciliation in the shadows of the wars and later open avenues for film to recapture the aftermath, devastation and prolonged social effects of war. 

This essay will focus particularly on the evolutionary trajectory of film in respect to World War I and World War II, while analysing its pre-war and post-war contexts in order to dissect films transformation due to war as a whole. In doing this, this essay hopes to examine the technological progression of film, discern the cultural shifts saw throughout this period and ultimately reflect on the significance of this era and its effects in entirely transforming film as a medium.

Prior to World War I, films were primarily novelty in nature, offering spectacle based entertainment rather than narrative. Films in this early era of what can be considered cinema had little focus on societal values and rather set out to mesmerize audiences. An early example of this can be seen with Georges Méliès's, 'A Trip to the Moon' or 'Le Voyage Dans La Lune', a 1902 French silent film which is often referred to as one of the first science fiction films (Melies 1902). Lacking any significant narrative, this film is purely that of visual spectacle, a phenomenon coined by film historian Tom Gunning as 'cinema of attractions' (Gunning 39). He argues that this concept dominates early cinema, and later becomes a component of narrative based films (39). This early portrayal of film reveals a relationship with audiences that hinges on spectacle rather than any social or thematic providence. Andre Gaudreault expands on this further, claiming that what we refer to as cinema dates to around 1910, where he argues the "notion that cinema is not a technical, but a cultural category" (Gaudreault x). This explanation supports the idea that film expands on not just the technological limitations of its time but the development of cultural practices across nations. This is most pressing when we see the beginning of global conflict in 1914, and consider this correlation with the early growth of cinema as a cultural category around the same time. While still limited by technological limitations such as synchronized sound, which wouldn't appear in film until 1927, there were notable movements made in film throughout the period of the First World War. These movements saw significant cultural shifts in how audiences perceived film, as well as technological advancements due to the demands of World War I. 

With the outbreak of World War I, came a significant new appreciation of cameras in the form of aerial photography and military camera technology. The applications of these new technologies would garner an extensive advantage in the war for intelligence and as such would usher in a new era of camera technological developments. While initially met with scepticism by the British High Command, use of photography within the Royal Flying Corps became a necessary venture and by the end of 1914, the first Photographic Section had been formed as part of the 1st Wing (Cable 2015). By 1915, significant improvements had been made to their camera technology, with increased lens sizes, focal length and later in the summer semi-automatically changing plates were introduced which allowed the rapid capture of photographs (Cable 2015). By September of the same year, a School of Photography was established at Farnborough to educate men in camera usage, maintenance and repair (Cable 2015). Photography became an essential element in warfare at the break out of the First World War, and Kodak greatly benefitted from this, developing smaller and more portable devices suitable for soldiers, despite orders making it illegal for soldiers to bring cameras to war (Jenkins). Most notable was the vest pocket camera, marketed as the "Soldiers Kodak Camera" (Jenkins). This camera was compact, measuring 12.5 x 6 x 2.5 centimetres and came in a military style case to be attached to soldiers belts (Canadian Kodak Co). This integration of cameras into the fields of war and pockets of soldiers allowed the preservation of the war experience and would later make possible documentaries of war. The avenue of the war would see camera sales increased fivefold for Kodak, and by 1918 almost two million cameras would have been sold (Jenkins). Not only did the war cause usher in a new rupture in camera technology, but it cultivated a rise in camera culture as a whole, a great contributor to the cultural shift that would inevitably change public perceptions of film.

Alongside the evolution of technology, the outbreak of World War I ushered in new perspectives on film, particularly its uses in relation to the global conflict. Paul Virilio in his book, 'War and Cinema,' claims that at core there cannot be war without representation, and psychological mystification (Virilio 6). He goes on to divulge the use of perception as a weapon in war, later concurring that "once the cinema was able to create surprise, it effectively came under the category of weapons" (8). With this in mind, examining the relationship between film and fact and their coalescence during the First World War highlights how film saw a significant cultural shift during this time. 'The Battle of the Somme' was a 1916 British war film which was captured on site by Geoffrey Malins and John McDowell (1916). The film depicts warfare, trench activity, infantry marches and both British and German soldiers, capturing the gruesome realities of the battle. The film acts as one of the earliest cases of both documentary and war filmmaking and was also used as a strategic tool by the British, in what can be considered early use of film propaganda. The popularity of the film allowed the government to spur support for the war and spark national unity. This was especially pressing when papers at the time were consistently documenting casualties resulting from these battles, sometimes in tandem with advertising for the film (Smither 2015). Another early example of World War I film propaganda was the American film 'The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin' which was released in 1918. While no full prints of this film has survived, it became a heavily advertised and successful blockbuster which  presents propagandist views of World War I, showing the exaggerated greed and malice of Kaiser Wilhelm II (Mirsalis 2008). The success and popularity of these films and others like them, reveal a cultural shift away from the cinema of attractions and into a new realm of politically charged narratives, with audiences resonating with the social prominence of the texts, and their presentation of the war cause which had become so embedded into everyday culture.

The First World War ushered in this change in film, opening up avenues of deeper thematic exploration in films as texts rather than just visual spectacles. These deeper thematic explorations echoed the virtues of society at the time. During the war, these cultural reflections captured the war cause and nationalism whereas in the period which followed the First World War, sentiments of loss, disillusionment and despair was evoked throughout the collective, and we can see this mirrored in film at the time. An example of this is in the emergence of German expressionism, like with films such as 'The Cabinet of Dr.Caligari', whose expressionistic style of angular, distorted set pieces reflects the social unease and instability of post-war Germany (1920). Similar to this, France saw the emergence of poetic realism in film, with films such as 'The Rules of the Game' releasing which would provide commentary on the social disillusionment and decay of human relationships in France during a post-war period where the aristocracy and French society was enduring tension and ruin (1939). The ruptures of new art forms like these were the epitome of the interwar period, and capture how a fragmented society grappled with the uncertainties of the post-war world. These movements were found not just in film, but art and literature as a whole, and as this sweeping cultural movement would align with significant advancements in film technology, films relationship with society was altered entirely. Alongside this, pivotal shifts in film technological progression were marked with the introduction of synchronized sound in film. 'The Jazz Singer' was released in 1927 and was the first film to have synchronized sound for dialogue sequences (1927). This advanced film as a narrative medium, one which could now interact more seamlessly with audiences through the use of sound and dialogue. This evolution, alongside the cultural shift which saw film enter the limelight as a more substantial form of media for audiences, would see film become an even increasingly more powerful tool used upon the outbreak of World War II. 

Throughout World War II, film would become an essential tool used by multiple nations to install and reinforce propaganda for each owns war cause. Film had developed an intrinsic relationship with the public, and as such had the ability to cultivate and manifest public opinion at the hands of state and government. Many historians argue that the significance of propaganda during this period is significantly underestimated, especially in what can be considered media-sophisticated societies (Chapman 679). The use of film as a tool to provoke propagandist ideas can be seen in full effect with its use in Nazi Germany under the leadership of both Adolf Hitler, and Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels alongside his wife Magda Goebbels. Through films such as 'The Eternal Jew' and 'Jud Süß', Goebbels was able to transcribe anti-Semitic narratives towards audiences, which would contribute to the normalization of Jewish hate that was being propagated throughout Nazi Germany (1940). In tandem with this, films such as 'Triumph of the Will' was able to cultivate unity under the Nazi cause by portraying Adolf Hitler and the Nuremberg Rally as a great spectacle which glorified the Nazi party and further reinforced the collective ideals which was being constructed through other forms of propaganda (1935). Similarly, Soviet propaganda utilised film in a similar vein, with films such as 'The Fall of Berlin' which portrayed the Soviet struggle against Germany. The film fostered determination among the soviet people and portrayed Stalin as a heroic figure, with his leadership being highlighted as a core element in the fight against both Germany and fascism (1949). While countries like German and Soviet propaganda hinged on their leaders as focal points, the use of propaganda in America and Britain focused more on rallying the support of the nation for the allied cause, while also tailoring perspectives of other countries involved in the war. 'Why We Fight' was an American series which framed the war cause to the public, fostering patriotism and depicting the Allies as heroes of liberty (1942-1945). Ultimately. film was transformed into a tool of propaganda which was utilised by all nations throughout this period, taking advantage of the intrinsic relationship film had fostered with the public and their perception of social themes.

Due to this sweeping transformation of film as a medium, narratives in film saw polarizing changes in the shadow of World War II. In the years which followed the war, traditional storytelling means would be challenged. Films general evolutionary trajectory would be formed alongside this and the great technological advancements made throughout the years of WW2. In response to the psychological impact of World War II and its consequences, films such as 'Rashomon' were created, it's director Akira Kurosawa using a multiple perspective narrative to capture the fragmentation seen in post-war Japan (1950). Similarly, Italian film director Roberto Rossellini set out to capture the trauma and moral troubles faced by Italy in the aftermath of the war in, 'Rome, Open City' (1945). In Rosalind Galt's, 'The New European Cinema' they reflect on the effects of the post-war world on film, and through a contemporary reading of cinema suggests that themes of loss, nostalgia and fragmentation are core to the historical image (Galt 8). This new wave of filmmaking premiered a newfound focus on deciphering societal values without the ongoing war dictating or tailoring narratives. This saw a shift in traditional film narratives, and ushered film into the realm of social commentary. While this was in immediate response to the general despair and disillusionment which followed in the wake of the war, these new ruptures in film would continue to shape the trajectory of film as a medium, distancing it further from the realm of cinema of attractions in which it originated. 

In examining the evolution of film across both World War I and World War II, we can see a clear shift in the trajectory of the mediums development as a direct result of the wars. It becomes clear the relationship which developed between film and society, as it became a medium which could both influence society and allow reflection in times of loss and disillusionment. The technological advancements made in response to the demands of war projected camera technology in a way which would bolster its popularity with the general populous, and allow newfound perspectives on war which was never possible prior. Simultaneously, film became a way to capture the spectacle of war while also revealing the tragedies which came with that. This resulted in the exposition of human vulnerability, which allowed exploitation in the form of propaganda. In this way, we can consider the wars as a catalyst which allowed the exponential growth of film as a medium, a transformation from simple attraction to a fundamental tool at the hands of state and country throughout the war effort. It's use as both a tool of war, and a medium for reconciliation in times of desperation reveals the dynamic capabilities of film and its reflection of societies cultural values as a whole.   