#assignment 

The First World War, or the Great War as it is often refereed to as, was a phenomenon which effects were felt across the world despite its action being central to Europe. Evidence of the wars relevance in the West can be found when analysing the collections of primary sources such as artefacts, photos, posters and letters which can reveal different perspectives on the war and provide an outlook as to how the war was perceived by those living in the United States throughout this time. The collection of sources chosen to be analysed will provide an outlook onto American perspectives on the war, and reveal attitudes surrounding the war. These sources range from a war-time music book, a Red Cross poster, a photograph depicting Red Cross rations and finally a letter from a member of the 18th Infantry. By analysing these sources, this essay aims to make observations into the perspectives of Americans during the war, those who were in the field and those who were not.  

The first of these primary sources is a music sheet for a war-time song titled, "If I'm not at the roll call: Kiss mother good-bye for me." The music is composed and written by George L Boyden and published by Leo Feist Inc. The promotional artwork on the front of the sheet music shows a group of soldiers in the trenches, collectively in thought imaging two figures, a man and woman, talking. The inside then contains the sheet music notation and lyrics to the piece. On back of the cover then contains an advertisement for an eighty page patriotic song book and a reference to an advertisement in The Saturday Evening Post. The advertisement appears to attempt to persuade readers purchase of the book with the incentive of experiencing the songs of the soldiers, also referred to as "their songs" in the comfort of the American home. It is also incentivised to purchase a copy for those who are dispatched with the slogan "send a copy to your boy over here or over there" being used. The print appears to be a war edition, with a notice from Leo Feist Inc. saying it is a smaller edition than usual to save paper during war times, with Save, save, save being named as the watchword of the day. While the George L Boyden sheet music is a 1918 publication, a date can be seen inscribed onto the top left corner of the music advertisement, which dates that to 27/13/2.  This primary source provides context into how the war was captured in pop culture and media of its time in America. Soldiers war songs being commercially composed and sold to the public with marketing incentives centralized around the war and pandering to those who had loved ones in the field. In addition to providing this perspective, this source also provides evidence into the song itself, significantly the lyrics as war music's origins often manifest through the reproduction or retelling of accounts. This source simultaneously provides insight into the relationship both those at home and those on the field had within media at the time.

The following primary source is WW1 poster which too contains illustrations as part of its promotion. This source is an advertisement for the red cross and list some affirmations about the red cross in relation to American soldiers in France. The information provided ensures that the red cross are on the lines protecting American soldiers and describes the hospitals, emergency dispensaries, hospital huts and other services they provide. The red cross here are described as home folks in service of their soldiers. The poster reveals information about the red cross and their commitment to the war and also displays how the red cross were portrayed to Americans and their families at home. Similarly to the music sheets, there is a repeated theme of pandering to those who have sons out in the field, with the title reading "your boy, your red cross and France". Unlike the music sheet this source isn't selling a product but still employs the same strategies as it did in pandering to those at home during war time. This is used to provide comfort and reassurance both for soldiers and their families. The words and iconography used portrays the red cross as every day Americans uniting in common cause. This affirms a strong image between the organization and their war effort to the American public. This shows how the likes of these posters can shape an image of organizations within the war and the war cause itself. Once again the title like the music sheet is an example of how wartime iconography capitalized on the emotional bonds between families and soldiers overseas. 

The following source is a photograph of rations sent by the Red cross to American prisoners of war in Germany. The image displays an array of rations including hand bread, cigarettes, beans and other tinned foods like beef and salmon. A typed statement provided informs that this was a weekly ration sent by the American Red Cross to American prisoners in Germany. The record provides additional information that the supplies were delivered from Washington to the Central Committee for American Prisoners at Berne, Switzerland from which point they were dispatched weekly in 20 pound packages to all American prisoners on record in the German and Austrian camps. The records show that 90% of the parcels thus sent, reached their destination. This source details the red cross' efforts in assisting American soldiers in Germany and the statement provided provides further detail and confirmation around the evidence provided in the photo. The legitimacy of this source is important in deciphering between the actual effort of the red cross in the war and what was presented to the American public. Sources like this provide reference and direct insight into the conditions of the war without the bias of intention that comes with forms of advertising and marketing.

The final source is a letter from a member of the 16th Infantry writing home to his mother in Douglas Arizona. He describes his experience to her and that they have been drilling steady. He goes into details on the wind and dust storms they've had to deal with and talks about how he may be transferred into the band but comments how he doesn't care for playing out in the wind and sun for the troops to drill. He says he never felt better in any of his life and that if the troops go to France next fall hell be one of the first to go. He details more about the care they must take for their rifles and provides some insight into coal coast. The source provides more information that he toured in the infantry band in Italy and was gassed and killed at Cantigny. The importance of this source is to get insight into an actual account of a soldier and their perspective of the war. While some of the previous sources gave insight into the dynamic between family and son relationships in the war, this letter allows us to perceive the attitudes of a soldier when writing to his mother. Reading his relaxed perspective of the war cause is telling of their perspectives on the war especially considering he would later go on to die in service. The importance of letters is tenfold as we can gain insight into the direct thinking of those at the times without external bias, while also learning many smaller details like the weather conditions and how the infantry operated.

# [[HI4247 Primary Source Assignment Draft 2 Prep]] 

# [[HI4247 Primary Source Assignment Draft 2]]  

