#assignment 

Upon the outbreak of war in the early 20th century, the U.S. found itself caught in an unwanted conflict which was due to stir civil unrest and divide public opinion. Exceedingly so when the American citizen was relied upon for both service and funding for any and all expenditures led by the country. What resulted was a clash of public opinion and state interest, an amalgamation of perspectives varying between the want for neutrality, the will to sympathize with the allies and the economic and financial interest by the state. As a result of this, when the tides of war brought the U.S. into the conflict, many efforts were made in the fields of war media to quell worries and to spur a patriotic sense of solidarity to encourage the war effort. The rupture of war media and propaganda as a result can be seen evident throughout the years of war, and primary sources are of great importance and significance in analysing these ruptures.

The source chosen for this analysis are dedicated to the effect of war propaganda and media in the U.S. and it's role in shaping perspectives of the war, the soldiers and the organizations involved in the war effort. Specifically, these sources will look at how media was used to shape Americans perspectives of the war and the role of the American Red Cross. They will reveal how the war and the Red Cross's efforts were presented to the American public and as a result how Americans perceived the war effort as a whole.

The primary source being analysed here range from war media in the form of a music sheet advertisement and a Red Cross poster, in addition to a photograph of Red Cross rations and supplies and a letter from an American soldier who served in the First World War. This analysis aims to look at the pieces of war media, their function and intended purpose and how this shapes American perspectives during the war times. The supplementary sources of the photograph and letter will be analysed in tandem to allow further insight into the role of the Red Cross and to understand how the use of war media and the promotion of solidarity altered soldiers perspectives approaching the war.

The first of these sources is a music sheet composition of a war-time song entitled, 'If I'm Not at the Roll Call: Kiss Mother Good-Bye for Me', written and composed by George L Boyden and published by Leo Feist Inc. The artwork on the front of this music booklet portrays a group of soldiers in the trenches, in collective thought imagine what can be assumed to be an imagine of a mother figure and a service man. Inside the booklet is the composition and lyrics for the song, one originated by soldiers and reimagined for this piece of sheet music. The reverse side of the booklet contains an advertisement for a patriotic song book and a reference to an advertisement in The Saturday Evening Post. The slogans and word choice here markets to those who have family dispatched over seas, referring to the songs in the book as 'their songs' and incentivising experiencing their songs in the comfort of your home. Additionally, the advertisement also urges buyers to send a copy to your boy over here or over there, specifically designed to be pocket sized also. On the front cover, it can be seen that the booklet is a war edition, with a notice informing that due savings on paper during war times it had to be published in a smaller edition. The music booklet itself is a 1918 publication.  This source gives context to the portrayal of war and soldiers in media as a marketing tool which pandered to the average American family who had boys deployed. War songs being commercially composed and resold gives insight into the commercial aspect of the war effort. Aside from the commercial and media implications, this source also importantly details a song originating from war and gives insight into soldier life during the war effort.

Similarly, the following source too both captures how the media portrayed war efforts while also providing information on some of Americas war efforts, in particular the role of the Red Cross. The primary source is of a poster advertisement for the Red Cross, titled ' your boy,  your red cross and France'. The poster depicts illustration artwork of the Red Cross and accompanying text reveals their services and intentions towards the war effort. The text ensures to readers that the Red Cross are in full support of American soldiers from dispatch to front lines and goes on to list their services such as hospitals, emergency dispensaries and hospital huts stationed along the lines. It also lists some of the expenditures of the Red Cross which holds great relevance into the prominence of Red Cross advertising. Similarly to the music booklet, this source appeals to the average American family home, describing Red Cross as home folks in service of their soldiers. This, alongside with the title, shows how the thematic representation of American families within the war effort has presence across multitudes of war media. This affirms a strong bond between the organization and the American public, creating an image of combined solidarity. It's posters and advertisements like these which played a pivotal role in shaping the American perspective of the role of the Red Cross throughout the war.

The next source further provides context on the Red Cross's efforts and its role in the war. It is a photograph detailing rations sent by the American Red Cross to prisoners of war being held in Germany. The image shows an array of beans, hand bread, cigarettes and tinned foods like beef and salmon. A statement provided informs that this was a weekly ration sent by the Red Cross to American prisoners in Germany. These supplies were delivered from Washington to the Central Committee for American Prisoners at Berne, Switzerland from which point they were dispatched weekly in 20 pound packages to the American prisoners in German and Austrian camps. The record shows that 90% of these parcels reached their destination. The importance of this source is in detailing direct evidence of the Red Cross's efforts in the war and not just how their role was portrayed to the public. Through this photograph, we gain insight into the resources available to the Red Cross, how they were delivered and dispatched and their effectiveness without the effect of bias or intention which comes with advertising and marketing.

The last source to be analysed is a letter written by a soldier of the 16th Infantry to his mother in Arizona. He describes to her his experience being part of the Infantry and tells her about their drilling and practices. The letter reveals how as well as being in the infantry, there are talks of him transferring to the Infantry band as he plays music. He goes on to detail the conditions and environment he's in, writing of dust storms and the need to keep their rifles clean. He writes that he has never felt better in his life and that if they are being dispatched to France he will be the first to go. He would later go on to tour Italy in the infantry band and later die in the Meuse-Argonne offensive. The significance of this source is in revealing the perspectives and naivety of soldiers at the time. Private Walter displays genuine delight to be a member of the Infantry and appears both willing and wanting to serve, and appears to write reassuringly to his mother despite the circumstances. Analysing the dynamic of this relationship in comparison to how soldier and family perspectives were being shown in the media is revealing, and depicts the effect of wartime media and propaganda in shaping perspectives. 

The influence of media throughout the wars years can consistently be seen through the analysation of primary source and through the academic studies of historians seasoned in the topic. Kevin Rozario's journal article, Mass Culture, the Red Cross and the Appeal of Modern American Humanitarianism, explores this further by exploring the Robert H Scotts efforts in 1917 to establish a new front for the Red Cross, in seek of support and financial aid as American deaths in the war continued to scale. He writes that as a result of this, the imperatives of patriotism and humanitarianism became hard to distinguish between, and as the Red Cross pushed to assist in what was described as a People War, commerical producers quickly seized the symbolic value of the Red Cross. However this effect can be seen not just in the Red Cross but across all of American due to the call of war. Christopher Capozzola's book, Uncle Sam Wants You: World War I and the Making of the Modern American Citizen, explores the roots of this and the creation of the iconic uncle sam figure through recruitment posters initially used by the british. He describes how the resulting poster helped Americans understand their relationship to war-time government and turned the mechanism of war mobilization into family relation.

This effect and its repercussions can be seen reflected across each of the sources analysed here. The humanization of the war effort and its tailoring by the media for the consumption of the average American family is visable across both the music booklet and the red cross poster. These sources reveal clear bias' in the presentation of the war effort, and the effects of these can be seen in the resulting perspectives of Americans during the war. The importance of both the photograph and letter as primary sources are of great significance when analysing the effect of war time media on public perspectives. They both provide further insight into the realities which war media often fails to, in both the physical representation of war effort and role in the war and in capturing the perspectives of those in the war through definite, recorded accounts from the time. This provides us context into these facets of history, and allows us to understand the bias' of war media as well as the significance of the peoples and organizations represented across these media.
